1 6 7 82 







M AX HA V R L A A R. 



KOINnUKGH : I’KINTRD HY I UOM AS CONS'I A Ul.l--, 


n>K 

EDMONSTON AND DOUGLAS. 


LONDON . . .... IIAMir.TON, ADAMS, ANT) C> 

CAMBriDCI- .... MACMH-I-AN A.Tl) CO. 

DUBLIN . . .... m‘(;LASIIAN AND CD I 


GLASGOW 


JAMKS M.ACLEIin.sr. 





MAX HAVEL AAR 


OR THE COFFEE AUCTIONS OF THE 
DUTCH TRADING COMPANY. 


i;v 

lllultatult. 


Translalt’d frotu the Original Mnunscri/'t by 

JBARON AJ.PHONSK NAHUYS. 



E I) 1 N B U R G H 

ED MON ST ON & DOUGLAS 

18 68 . 





PREFACE. 

Max IIavklaar was pulAished a few years ago, and 
caused such a sensation in llolland as was never l)efore 
experienced in that country. Tlie author wrote it under 
tlie pseudonym of ]\[ultatuli, hut his real name, Eduard 
Doiiwes Dekker, formerly Assistant Eesident of the Dutch 
Government in Java, at once hecame known. Full of 
fire, and overtlowing witli enthusiasm, the author pre- 
sented it to his countrymen in the form of a novel,-- a 
book wherein he made them acquainted with the incredible 
extortions and tyranny of which the natives of the Dutch 
Indies, “ that magnificent empire of Insulind, wliich winds 
about the equatijr like a garland of emeralds,” are the 
victims, and how he tried in vain, while still in the service 
of the Government, to put an end to the cruel oppressiohs 
that happen every day in those countries. Though some 
considered liis book to be merely an interesting and cap- 

b 



VI 


TKEFACE. 


tivatincf novel, the autlior iiiaiutaiued that it contained 
nothing hut facts. He boldly asked the Dutch Govera- 
nient to prove the suhstamr of his book to be false, but 
its truth has never been disputed. At the International 
Congress for the promotion of Social Sciences at Ain- 
sterdain, in 18G3, he challenged his countiymen to refute 
him, but there was no champion to accept the challenge. 
In short, Mr. Douwes Dekker, who had betai a functionary 
in the service of the Dutcli Government lor the .'^])ace ot 
seventeen years, ratlier understated than overstated the 
truth. Xot a single fact was ever contested in Holland, 
and he is still ready to prove his stateimuits.^ In the 
Dutch Parliament nobody answen'd a single word, but 
Mr. Van Twist, ( x-Governor-Gemn'al of the Dutch lmli(‘s, 
who, on being appeah;d to by th(‘ Paron Van Hocvdl, 
said that he could lurlmps refute ]\Iax Havelaar, but that 
it was not his interest t(j do so. 

The book proves that wliat was foi*nierly written in 
Unde Turns Cahin of the cruelties ])crp(‘t rated u]>on the 

^ Mr. Vetli, the well-known learned Orientali.st at Leyden, wlio 
made a .special study of Indian matters, declared tliat Mnltatnli under- 
stated the truth, and ipiotcd many authors, such as Mr. Vitali.s arid 
others, who lia<l ]»ulili«hc<l .accounts of scenes and facts mueli more 
shocking than hej had dc[)ictc<l. Mr. Vctli eoinpliinented Mult.atuli 
upon his moderation, saying that lie displayed a mastership of art in 
not exhausting the subject. 



TREFACE. 


vii 

slaves in America, is notliiiig in comparison to what hap- 
pens every day in the Dutch Indies. 

'' Max Havelaar” is tlie name under whicli the autlior 
chooses to describe his experiences in the East; in the first 
chapters of tlie book he has just returned from India, and 
he meets an old school-companion, at that time a coffee- 
broker, a Mr. Dry stubble. This Mr. Drystubble is very rich, 
and the autlior being just then very poor, the latter asks his 
old school- fellow to be security for the publishing of his 
book. At first Mr. Drystubble will ne t hear of this, but 
afterwards, when he perceives that it will be of some 
advantage to himself, he consents. Drystubble is a very 
characteristic person, knowing nothing beyond his trade, 
a great egotist, and is represented by the author with true 
wit and humour, in order to show the extreme contrast 
between himself and .... some of his countrymen, whom 
he may perhaps have met with since his return from 
Java. At that time the author wears a plaid or shawl, 
and Mr. Drystubble therefore speaks always of him as 
Mr. Shawlmaii. A few months after the publication of 
Max Ilavelaar, one of the most eminent members of the 
Dutch Parliament avowed that this book had struck the 
whole country wfith horror. In vain the Dutch tried to 



VIU 


PREFACE. 


make a party question of it. Tlie author openly de- 
clared that he belonged neither to the Liberal nor to 
the Conservative party ; hnt that he placed himself under 
the banner of EiciiT, equity, and humanity. As soon, 
however, as he professed to be a mere friend of man- 
kind, without bias to any political party, the official 
world aA'oided even to pronounce his name, and affected 
to have forgotten the man whose conduct had before 
been considered as a reproof, and Avhosc influence men- 
aced danger to peojtle in jdace. Instead of accepting 
the challenge, it seemed more Avorthy to fight tlie battle 
out Avith the vile Aveapons of abuse and slander. (If 
course the reader Avill not regard Mr. Diystubble’s non- 
sensical and hypocritical observations as the seiitimeiits of 
our author. It is precisely iMultatuli’s intention to make 
Drystubble odious, and his philosophy absurd, though 
sometimes he speaks truth and common-sense — for he is 
a tyjie of a jiart of the Dutch nation. 

So much for the tendency of the book. Need I say that 
it Avill do honour to the litiTaturc of any language, and 
that it may he read as Avell for profit as for amu.semeut ? 
But Max llavdaar is immortal, not because of literary 
art or talent, but because of the cause he advocates. 1 
think that every one who admires Harriet Beecher StoAve’s 



PREFACE. 


IX 


immortal pleading, ought likewise to read Multatuli’s 
accusation. I compare Max Havelaar to Uncle Tom's 
CaUn, hut I do not compare Miiltatuli, the champion 
and the martyr of humanity and justice, to Mrs. Stowe, 
for T am not aware that that lady, rvith all lier merits, 
has sacrificed future fortune, and all that makes life agi’ee- 
ahlo, for a principle — for right and equity — as has been 
done by Eduard Douwes Dekker. Mnoi Havelaar bears 
evidence of having l)een written by a genius of that order 
which only appears at long intervals in the world’s history, 
llis mind embraces in its intellectual conqrass all man- 
kind, regardless of race or caste. By the diffusion of 
this book a bond will bo formed embracing all lovers of 
genius and justice throughout the world. 

It was the intention of the author to have had his work 
translated into all the European languages. Unfortunately 
he unwittingly disposed of the property of his own book, 
find if it had not thus been “legally” withlield from the 
people of Holland, it is probable that 1 should not have 
been its translator ; but I have been constrained to make 
known as widely as possible the sad truth reganiing the 
mal-administration of laws in themselves good, by the 
Dutch Government in her Indian dependencies. To the 
British nation the facts will be new, as the books pub- 



X 


PREFACE. 


lislied in England on Dutch India are few in number, 
superficial in character, and give no idea of tlie condi- 
tion of the native population. I cannot judge of English 
politics or about Britisli India, but however perfect Bri- 
tish rule may be, it cannot be so perfect that it lias 
nothing more to learn. 

ALVITOXSK JOITAX BKIIXARD JI(>IlST}rA}i XAIfrYS. 

Tiik Hague, 

Janunry 17, ISfiS. 



TO 


®&£tliine ^utette, ISatontag TOgnbetflen. 

“ J’ai souvent eutenclu plaindre les femmes de poete, et sans doute, 
pour teiiir digiicment dans la vie ce difficile emploi, aucime qiialitt^ 
n’est de trop. Le plus rare ensemble de merites n’est que le strict 
nccessairc, ct no suffit infime pas toujours an commun bonlieur. 
Voir sans cesse la muse en tiers dans vos plus familiers entretiens, 
— recucillir dans ses bras et soigner ce poete qni est votre mari, 
quand il vous revieiit meurtri j)ar les ddeeptions de sa tdche ; — on 
bien Ic voir s’envoler il la poursuite de sa chii'idre . , . voibi Fordi- 
iiaire de I’existence pour une femme de poete. Oui, mais aussi il 
y a le chapltre des compensations, I’heure dcs lauriers qu’il a gagnes 
il la sucur de son gdiiie, et qu'il ilC‘pose pieuseuient aux i>ieds de la 
femme Idgitimement aimec, aux genoux de I’Antigone qui sert de 
guide en ce monde a cot ‘ avcugle errant ; ’ — 

“Car, ne vous-y-trouipez-pas : presque tons les petit-fils d'llomere 
sont plus ou moins aveugles k leur fa^on ; — ils voient ce que nous 
lie voyons ims ; leurs regards pdndtrent plus liaut et plus an fond 
que les nCtrcs ; mais ils no savent pas voir droit devant eux leur 
petit boiiliomme do cliemin, ct il seraient capablea de trebucher et 
tie se casser le iioz siir le moimlre cailloii, s’U letir fallait clicminer 
sans soutien, dans ees valldca de prose oil denieure la vie.” 


(Henrv de P^ne.) 



OFFICER. My Lord, this is the man who murdered Betsy. 

JUDGE. He must hang for it. ITow did he do it ? 

OFFICER. He cut up her body in little pieces, and salted them. 

JUDGE. He is a great criminal. He must hang for it. 

LOTHARIO. My Lord, I did not murder Betsy : I fed and clothed 
and cherished her. I can call witnesses who will prove me to be a good 
man, and no murderer. 

JUDGE. You must hang. You blacken your crime by your self- 
sufficiency. It ill becomes one who .... is accused of anything to 
set u]) for a good man. 

LOTHARIO. But, my Lord, .... there are Mutnesses to prove it ; 
and as I am now accused of murder .... 

JCDGE. You must hang for it. You eut up Betsy — you salted 
the pieces — and you arc satisfied with your conduct, — three capital 
counts who arc you, my good woman ? 

WOMAN, I am Betsy. 

LOTHARIO. Thank God ! You see, my Lord, that I di<l not 
murder her. 

JUDGE. Humidi ! ay what ! What about the salting ? 

BETSY. No, my Lord, he did not salt me ; on the contrary, 

he did many things for me ... . he i.s a worthy man ! 

LOTHARIO. You hear, my Lord, she says 1 am an honest man. 

JUDGE. Humph .' the third count remains. Officer, remove tlio 

prisoner, he mu.st hang for it ; he is guilty of self-conceit. 

( U npuhUjshed PUi y . ) 



CIIAPTEIJ T. 

I AM a coffee-broker, and live at No. 37 Lanrier Canal, 
Amsterdam. I am not accustomed to write novels or 
works of that kind ; tlierefore it took me a long time be- 
fore 1 could resolve to order a few extra quires of paper 
and begin this book, which you, dear reader, have just 
taken in hand, and which you must finish, whether you 
are a coffee-broker or anything else. Not only that I 
never wrote anything that resembled a novel, but I even 
do not like to read such things, because I am a man of 
business. For many years I have asked myself what 
is the use of such works, and 1 am astonished at the 
impudence with which many a poet or novelist dares to 
tell you stories which never happened, and often never 
could have happened at all. If I in my position, — I am 
a coffee-broker, and live at No. 37 Lauricr Canal, — 
made a statement to a Principal, that is, a pemon who 
sells coffee, in which I related only a small part of the 
lies which form the greater part of poems and novels, he 


A 



2 


MAX HAVELAAK. 


would immediately cease to employ me, and go over to 
Busselinck and Waterman, who are likewise coifee-brokers, 

^but you need not know their address. Therefore I take 

good care not to write any novels, nor to advance any 
false statements. I have always remarked that persons 
who do so are often badly ofl'. I am forty-tliree years 
of age, I liave visited tlie Exchange for the last tAventy 
years, and, therefore, I can come forward whenever you 
are in want of a person of experience. How many firms 
do T know which have been utterly ruined ! And gene- 
rally, when looking for the causes of tludr failure, it ap 
peared to me that they must be attributed to the wrong 
direction which most of them followed in the beginning. 

My maxims are, and will always be. Truth and Com- 
mon-sense ; making, of course, an cxcejition with regard 
to the Holy Scriptures. The origin of tliis fault may be 
traced to our cliildreii’s poet. Van Aljdien,^ in liis very 
first line, about “ dear little babies.” What tlie deuce 
could make that old gentleman declare liimsclf to be an 
adorer of my little sister Gertrude, wlio had weak eyes, 
or of my brother Gerard, who always played with his 
nose ? and yet, he says, that he sang those j)omns in- 
spired by love.” I often thought when a child, “ My dear 
fellow, I should like to meet you once, and if you refus(Ml 
me the marbles which 1 should ask you for, or the 

Ulieronyinus Van Alphen, author of JAtth IWinn for ChUArni, otc., 
wa.9 born in 1746, diod in ISOd. 



MAX IfAVELAAR. 


3 


initials of iny name in chocolate - my name is Batavus 
— then 1 should believe you to he a liar.” But I never 
saw Van Alphen; he was dead, I think, when he told 
us that my father was my best friend, and that my little 
dog was so grateful (we never kept any dogs, they are 
so very dirty) ; altliougli I was much fonder of little 
Paul AVinser, who lived near us in Batavier Street. 

All lies ! And yet in this manner education goes on : 
— Tlie new litthi sister came from the v(*getable-woman 
in a big cabbage?.” “All Dutchmen are brave and gener- 
ous.” “ The Poinans were glad that the Batavians allowed 
them to live.” “The Bty of Tunis got a colic when he 
lieard the Dutch colours flapping.” “ The Duke of Alva 
was a monster.” ^ “ The ebb-tide (in 1G72, I believe) 

lasted a little longer than usual, only to protect the 
JS'etherlands.” Nonsense ! Holland has remained Hol- 
land because our forefathers knew lunv to manage tlieir 
affairs, and because they had the true religion — that is 
the reason. And tlien came other lies. “A girl is an 
ang(fl.” Whoever first discovered that never had any 
sisters. Love is a bliss ; you fly with some dear object 
or other to the end of the earth. The t'artli has no end, 
and such love is all nonsense. Xobody can say that 
I do not live on good terms with my wife, — she is 
a daughter of Last and Co., coftee-brokers, — nobody can 
find fiiult with our marriage. I am a member of the 
' Soo t\\v History of Hollaiul. 



4 


MAX TIAVELAAK. 


fashionable Artis ’’ club/ she has an Indian 
shawl which cost £7, 13s. 4d., but yet wo never in- 
dulged in such a foolish love as would have urged us to 
fly to the extremities of tlie eaiih. Wlion we married, 
we made an excursion to the Hague. She there bought 
some flannel, of which I still wear shirts ; and further 
our love has never driven us. So, I say, it is all 
nonsense and lies ! And should my marriage now he. 
less happy than that of those pei’sons who out of pure 
love become consumptive, or tear the hair out of their 
heads ? Or do you think that my household is less 
orderly than it would be, if seventeen years ago I had 
promised my bride in verse that 1 should marry her ^ 
Stuff and nonsense ! yet I could have done such a thing 
as well as aii}* one else; for the making of verses is a 
profession certainly less difficult than ivory turning, other 
wise how could bon-bons with mottoes be so cheap ? 
Only compare their price with that of two billiard balls. 
I have no olijection to verses. If you like to put th«r 
words into a line, very well ; but do not say any tiling 
beyond the truth ; thus,- 

“ The clock strike.s four 
And it rain.s no more." 

I will not say anytliiiif; against that, if it is in.lood font 

* A club at the Zonlogical Gardens, wlinuc mottfi in “ Artis Natiira 
magistra. ” 



MAX lIAVELAAlt. 


5 


o’clock, aud it has really stopped raining. But if it is a 
quarter to three, then I, who do not put niy words in 
verse, can say, " It is a quarter to three, and it has stopped 
raining.” But the rhymer, because it rains “ no more,” is 
bound to say “ four.” Either the time or the weather 
must be changed, and a lie is the result. And it is not 
rhyming alone that allures young people to untruth. Go 
to the theatre, and listen to all the lies they tell you. 
Tlic hero of the piece is saved from being drowned by a 
person who is on the point of becoming a bankrupt. 
Then, as we are told, he gives liis preserver half his 
fortune, — a statement that cannot be true, as I proceed 
to show. Wlien lately my hat was blown by the wind 
into the I'rinsen Canal, 1 gave the man twopence who 
brought it back to me, aiul he was satisfied. Iknow very 
well that I ought to have given a little more if he had 
saved my own self from drowning, but certainly not half 
my fortune ; for it is evident that in such a case, foiling 
twice into the water wovdd quite ruin me. The worat of 
llicse scenes on the stage is, that people become so much 
accustomed to untruths, that they get into the habit of 
admiring and api»lauding them. I should like to throw all 
such ui»plauders into the water, to see how many of them 
really meant that applause. I, who love truth, liereby give 
notice, that 1 won’t pay half my fortune for being fished 
up. lie who is not satisfied with less, need not touch me. 
Gn Sundays only I should give a little more, on account 



G 


JfAX irxVVKLAAK. 


of my gold chain and best coat. Yes ! many i)ersons 
become corrupted by the stage, much more than by 
novels, for seeing is believing. With tinsel and lace cut 
out in paper, all looks so very attractive, that is to say, 
for children and men who are not accustomed to busi- 
ness. And even Avhen they want to represent poverty, 
their representation is generally a lie. A girl whose 
father has become n bankrupt, works to supi)ort her 
family. Very well ; you see hei‘ on the stage, sewing, 
knitting, or embroidering. Now, do count the stitches 
which she makes during a whole act. She talks, she 
sighs, .she runs to the window, she does everything 
except work. Surely the family that can live by .such 
work needs very little. I'his girl i.s, ofcour.se, the hcroim*. 
She has pushed some scilucers down-.stairs, and cries 
continually, “Oh, mother, mother !” and thus .she repre- 
sents Virtue. A nice virtue indeed, which takes a year 
in making a jmir of stockings ! 1 loes not all this servo 

to give you false ideas of virtue, and of " labour for daily 
bread ?” All hdly and lies ! Then her fir.st lover, who 
was formerly a copying-chnk, but is now immensedy rich, 
returns suddenly, and mairies her. Li(,‘s again. He who 
has money does not marry a bankrupt’s daughter, "^'oti 
think that such a .sceni; will (h> on the stage*, as an (‘xcep 
tional case, but the audience will mi.stake the exc(‘ption 
for the rule, and thus Ixicome demoralized by a<!customing 
themselves to applaud on the .s/c'ye, that which in the 



MAX UAVELAAR. 


7 


world every respectable broker or merchant considers to 
be ridiciilons madness. When I was married, we were 
thirteen of us at the office of my father-in-law, Last and 
Co., — and a good deal of business was done there, I can 
assure you. And now for more lies on the stage : — When 
the hero walks away in a stiff, stage-like manner, to 
serve his native country, why does the back-door always 
open of itself ? 

And thou this Virtue rewarded ! — oh, oh ! I have been 
these seventeen years a coffee-broker, at No. 37 Laurier 
Canal, and I have luul a great deal of experience, but 
I am always much shocked wlien I .‘roo the dear, good 
truth so distorted. Kkwaijdeu Vii-tuc, forsooth! just as if 
A irtue was a trade commodity ! It is not so in the world, 
and it is very good that it is not si), for where would be 
the real merit if virtue were always roAvarded ? Why 
then ahvays invent such shameful lies ? There i.s, for 
instance, Lucas, the Avarehouse-porter, Avho had been in 
the emi)loy of Last and Co.’s father, the firm Avas then 
Last and Meyer, but the Meyers are no longer in it, — he 
Avas really an honest man, in my opinion. NoAcr Ava.s 
a single coffee-bean missing ; he Avent to church A’ery 
])unetually; and Avas a teetotaller. When my’ father- 
in-law Avas at his eountry .seat at Driebcrgen, this man 
ke]tt the house, the ea.sh, aiul CAcrything. Once the 
bank ])aid him seventeen guilders too much, and he 
returned them, lie is now too old and gouty to Avork. 



8 


MAX IIAVELAAH. 


and therefore starves, for onr large business transactions 
require young men. Well, this Lucas has been a very 
virtuous man— but is he rewarded ? Does a prince give 
him diamonds, or a fairy nice dinners ? Certainly not ; 
he is poor, and he remains poor, and that must be so. 
I cannot help him. We want active young men for our 
extensive business ; but if I could do anything for him, 
his merit would be rewarded in an easy life, now that 
he is old. Then if all warehouse-porters, and everyboily 
else became virtuous, all would be rewarded in this 
world, and there would remain no s])ecial rewanl for tlu; 
good people hereafter. Hut on the stage they distort every- 
thing — turn everything into lies. 

I too am virtuous, but dt> I a.sk a reward for that ? 
When my affairs go on well, a.s they generally do ; when 
my wife and children are healthy, so that I liav(! nothing 
to do with doctors; when I can put iiside every year a 
small sum for old age ; wlicn Fred behaves wcdl, that he 
may be able to takemyidace when I retire t<j my laaintiy 
scat near Jdriebergen,--tben I am rjuite satisfied. Hut all 
this is only a natural eonserpicnee of circumstances, ami 
because I attend to my Imsiness. I claim nothing for my 
virtue ; and that I am a virtuou.s man is evident from 
my love for truth, which i.s .second ordy to my great in 
clination to my Faith - I sliould like to convince you of 
this, dear reader, beca\i.se it i.s my e.xcuse for writinj; this 
book. Another passion cfpially .strong is my love of busi- 



MAX IIAVELAAli. 


9 


n(*ss. T am a coffee-broker, at No. 37 J.aiuier Canal. 
AVell, reader, this l)Ook owes its existence to my inviolable 
love for truth, and my zeal for business. 1 will tell you 
how all this has happened. But as 1 must now leave you 
for some time, being obliged to go to the Exchange, I in- 
vite you to a second chapter. Pray, take this with you ; 
it may be f)f service to y(ju. Look here, — my card,— I am 
the “ Co.,” since the ileyers went out— old Last is my 
(athcr-in-law : — 


Xdst d' Co.j 

( ■ f]t'okci*Sy 

( (b. 'V/ r ffUKiI. 



ClIAPTElf II. 

Businkss is slack on the Coffee Exchange. The Sjn-ing 
Auction will make it right again. Don’t sui')])ose, how- 
ever, that we have nothing to do. At Eusselinck and 
Waterman’s trade is slacker still. It is a strange world 
this : one gets a deal of exj)eriencc by frecjuenting llu! 
Exchange for twenty years. Only fancy that they hat'e 
tried — I moan Eusseliuck and \\aterinan — to do nie out 
of the custom of Ludwig Stern. As I do not know 
whether you are familiar with the Exchange, I will tell 
you that Stern is an eminent colfee merchant in Ham 
burg, who always cmiiloyed List and Co. (^uite acci 
dentally I found that out I mean that bungling busines.s 
of Eus.seliuck and Waterman. They had offered to re 
duce tlie brokerage by one fourth per cent, Tliey aiv 
low fellow.s nothing else. And now look wliat I liavi; 
done to stop them. Any one in my place would perhaps 
have written to Ludwig Stern," tlial we too would diminish 
the brokerage, and that we hoped for consi.leration 
aixouiit ol the long .services of List and Co.” 


on 



MAX IIAVKLAAR. 


11 


1 have calculated that our firm, during the last fifty 
years, has gained four hundred thousand guilders by Stern. 
Our connexion dates from the beginning of the continental 
system, when we smuggled Colonial produce and such like 
tilings from Heligoland. No, I won’t reduce the brokerage. 

I went to the Polen coffee house, ordered pen and paper, 
and wrote : — 

“ That because of the many honoured commissions re- 
“ ccdvcd from North Germany, our business transactions 
“ liad been extended” — [it is the simple truth] --'^and that 
“ tliis necessitat(!d an augmentation of our staff”-— [it is the 
truth : no more tlian yesterday evening our liookkeeper 
was in the ollice altcu’ eleven o’clock to look for his spec- 
tacles] ;- “lhat, above all things, we were in great want 
“ of resiiectable, (‘dueated young men to conduct the Ger- 
“ man correspoudenci*. That, certainly, there were many 
“ young Germans in Amsterdam, who possessed the re- 
“ quisite ipialilieat ions, but that a ri'speetable linn ” — [it is 
the very truth], — “ seeing the frivolity and immorality of 
“ young men, and the daily iner(‘asing number of adven- 
“ turers, and with an eye to the necessity of making cor- 
“ roctness of conduct go hand in hand with lorreetness 
“in th(‘. execution of orders” — [it is the truth, observe, 
and nothing but the Initli], “ that s\U‘h a tirm— I mean 
“ Last and (’o., eolfee-brokers, oT Laurier Canal could 
“ not b(‘ anxious enough in engaging new bands.” 

All that is the simple truth, reader. Ho you know 



12 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


that the young German who always stood at the Ex- 
change, near the seventeenth pillar, lias eloped witli the 
daughter of Busselinck and Waterman ? Our Mary, like 
her, will be tliirtecn years old in September. 

That I had the honour to hear from IMr. Saffelm'” — 
[Saifeler travels for Stern]— that the honoured lunid of 
the firm, Ludwig Stern, had a son, ^Vlr. Ernest Stern, 
who wished for employment for some time in a Dutch 
house.” 

'' That I, mindful of this — [here I referred again to the 
immorality of cmploy^Sy and also to the history of that 
daughter of Busselinck and Waterman ; it won’t do any 
harm to tell it],- --“ tliat I, mindful of this, wished, with 
“ all my heart, to offer Mr. Ernest Stern the German cor- 
“ respoiidence of our firm.” 

From delicacy I avoided all allusion to honorarium or 
salary; yet I said : — 

Tliat if Mr. Ernest Stern would like to stay with us, 
“ at 37 Laurier Canal, my wife would cartj for him as a 
mother, and liave his linen mended in tlie house” 
[that is tlie very trutli, for Mary sews and knits very 
well],— and in conclusion 1 .said, “ tlnit we were a ivli- 
gious family.” 

The last sentence may (hi good, for the Sterns are 
Lutherans. 1 posted that hjtter. You understand that 
(jld ^Ir. Stern could not vmy well givi.* his custom to 
Busscjlinck and Waterman, if his s(in were in our ullicc. 



MAX ITAVELAAn. 


13 


T nm very anxious for a reply. But to return to my book. 
Some time ago I walked one evening through Kalver 
Street, and stopped looking into a shop where a grocer 
was diligently sorting a quantity of — 

“ Java viiddling, fine, yclloiv, Cheribon coffee, 
slightly damaged]' 

which interested me much, for I am very inquisitive. 
Sudilcidy T ol).served a gentleman standing next to me in 
front of a bookseller's shop, whom I thought I had seen 
bef)re, tliough I endeavoured in vain to recollect him. 
lie, loo, seemed to recognise me; for every moment we 
looked at one another. I must confess, that I really was 
too much interested in the adulterated cotfee immediately 
to observe, what T saw afterwards, viz., that his clothes 
were very shabby; otherwise I should not have takmi 
any notice of him ; but all of a sudden I thought, pcihaps 
he is a commercial traveller f >r a (lerman firm, which is 
in need of a trustworthy broker. He had rather a German 
lace, and appeared sonu'thing of a traveller too ; he was 
v(‘ry fair, with blue eyes, and had something about him 
whicli made you think that he was a foreigner. Instead 
of a respectable winter coat he wore a shawl or plaid, and 
looked as if ho had just elided a long journey. 1 thought 
I saw a customer, and gave him an adilress card, “ Last 
and ('’o., GoUec-brokers, 37 Laurier Canal.” He took it, 
and holding it near tlie gaslight looked at it, and saiil. 



14 


MAX IIAVELAAR. 


I thank you, but I was mistaken ; I thought I had the 
pleasure of seeing an old school-fellow, but... Last... that 
is not the right name.” 

Excuse me,” I said, for I am always polite, “ I am 
Mr. Drystubble — Bata\ms Drystubble ; Last and Co. is 
the firm, cofiee-brokers, at No. 37 Laurier Canal.” 

“ Well, Diy stubble, don’t you know me ? Look me 
straight in the face.” 

The more I looked him in the fiico, the moi*e I remem- 
bered having seen him before ; but, strange to say, his face 
made an impression on me as if I smelt foreign i)eirumes. 
Do not laugh at that, reader; by and by you will see liow 
that was. I feel (piite a.ssured that ho had not a drop of 
perfumery about him, and yet I smelt something v(‘rv 

strong, something which reminded me of then T kii(‘W 

him ! 

Was it you,” I said, “ wlio resciual im* from tlie GiH‘ek ?” 

To be sure,” said he, “ and how an‘ you ?” 

I told liim tliat we were tliiileen of us in our oHic(*, and 
that we liad [ilenty to do, and tlien I askc.sl Iiini how lie 
had got on, wliieli I felt quiti? sorry for afterwards, for it 
appeare<l tliat his }H‘Cuniary cireuinstamM's wme m»t pros- 
peroiLs, and I dislike ]>oor jjeople, liecaiisii it is for the 
most part their own fault, as the Lind wouhl not forsake*, 
a person who had served Him faitlifully. If I had only 
said, ^^We are thiileen of us,” and “I wish you good- 
night, then I should have got rid of liini ; but these 



MAX HAVELAAK. 


1 5 

({uestioiis and replies made it every minute more difficult 
to shake him off. However, I must confess, that if I had 
shaken him off you would not have had tliis hook to read, 
for it owes its existence to that meeting ! I like to look 
at the bright side of eveiything, and those who do not 
are discontented creatures : 1 can’t hear them. Yes, yes, 
it was the same person who had rescued me out of the 
clutches of the Greek ! Don’t think, however, that I 
liad been taken ])risoner by pirates, or that I had had a 
Ijrawl in tlie Levant. I have told you already that I 
went, after my marriage, with my wife to the Hague, 
where we saw the Museum, and buuglit flannel in Veene 
Street, — the only excursion that my extensive business at 
Amsterdam ever allowed me. No ; it was on my account 
that lie gave a Greek a bloody nose, for always interfer- 
ing with other people’s business. It was in tlie year 
1834 I think, and in Si'idember, the annual fair-time at 
Amsterdam. As my parents intended to mak(‘ a clergy- 
man of ni(‘, I learned Lit in. Afterwards, I often won- 
dered why you must uiulemtaiid Litiii to say in Dutch, 
“ God is gootl.” Knough, I went to the Liiin scliool, now’ 
called the Gymnasium, and there was the fair,- in Am- 
sterdam, 1 mean. On the Wester ^larket w’ere 1>ooths ; 
and if you, reader, are an Amsterdammer, and about my 
age, you will remember that in one of them w*a3 a most 
beautiful girl w ith hlaek eyi‘s, dressed as a Greek ; her 
father too was a Greek, or at least he had the appearance 



16 


MxVX ILVVELxVAK. 


of a Greek. They sold all sorts of perfumes. 1 was just 
old enough to think the girl very beautiful, without having 
the courage to speak to her. Such an attempt would hav(^ 
been fruitless ; for a girl of eighteen thinks a boy of six- 
teen a child, and there she is quite I’ight. Yet we school 
boys always went to the Wester JMarket to see that girl. 

Now, he who stood before me with the plaid was onci^ 
with us, though some years younger than tlio rest, and 
therefore too childish to look at tlie Grecian girl ; but lie 
was dux of our claSvS, — for lie was very clever, tliat I must 
confess, — and he was very fond of playing, romping, and 
fi‘diting ; therefore lie was with us. While w'c looked from 
a distance at the Grecian girl (I tliink w'e were ten of us), 
and deliberated how w^e should set about making ac([uainl- 
ance wdth her, w’e made up our minds to put our momy 
together to buy something. J>ut then it was very diHicult 
to know who sliould be so bold as to speak to tlie girl. 
Every one liked it, luit nobody dared attempt it. We 
cast lots, and I w'as chosen. X<nv, 1 confe.ss that I do 
not like to brave dangers; 1 am a husband and a father, 
and think every one who braves danger to b(‘ a fool : this 
you may read in the Hible. It is a great satisfaction for 
me to find that I think about danger and suchlike things 
exactly as I rlid many years ago. I have still the same 
opinion as 1 had on that very evening when I stood close 
to the Greek’s booth, with th(‘ twelve iieiice w’e had put 
togetlier in my hand. Ihit because of false slianif*, I dared 



MAX HAVELAAfl. 


17 


)iot say that I had not the courage to do it ; ])osid(is, J 
!iad to advance against my will, for my companions pushed 
me, and soon I was standing before the booth. 

I did not see the girl ; I saw nothing. All became 
green and yellow before my eyes...! stammered out the 
First Aorist of I do not know which verb... 

Plait-il V said she. I recovered a little and continued, 
— ‘‘ Mrjvtv detSf, and that Egypt was a present from 
the Nile.”... I feel quite sure that I should have made her 
acquaintance if one of my companions had not at that 
inonient given me such a punch in the back that I 
.stiuiibled with rnucli violence against tlie booth. I felt 
a grasp at my neck, a second one mucli lower, and before 
I had time to think about iny position, I was inside the 
tent with the (Ircek, who told me in veay intelligible 
Frencli, that I was a '‘gamin,” and that he would call 
th(‘. " polic(?.” Now, I was very near the girl, but it gave 
me no pleasure at all. I cried, ainl prayed for mercy, for 
f wa.s much afraid. Hut there was no help for it ; the 
(fretdv took ludd of my arm, and kicked me. I looked 
for my comrades. We bad just n‘ad t1\at morning about 

Scievola, who })ut his hand in tlie fire and in our 

Latin thenu's wii tliouglit it so tine and so elevated 

Pooh ! nobody stayed to put his liand in tlie tire for me 1! 
So I thought, lUit all of a sudden, our friend of the 
Plaid, or Shawlman, as W(» sliall ('all him, rushed through 
the l»aek entrance into tin* booth, lie was then neither 



18 


MAX JIAVELAAH. 


tall nor strong, and only thirteen years old, but he was a 
brave and nimble little fellow. J still see the sparkling 
of his eyes ; ho gave the Greek a blow with his fist, and I 
was saved. Afterwards I heard that the Cireek di nbbed 
him soundly, but as I have a steady principle never to 
meddle with other people’s business, I ran away immedi- 
ately, and so I did nut sec it. 

That is the reason Avhy his face reminded me so much 
of perfumes, and how easy it is in Amsterdam to (juarrel 
with a Greek. 

Afterwards, Avhenever that man was witli his booth on 
tlie Wester 3Jarket, I always went elscwliere to amuse 
myself. 

As I am very fond of philosophical observations, I must 
be allowed to remark liow strangely all things hang to- 
gether in this world. If the eyes of that girl had been 
lighter, if her tri'sses had been shorter, or the boys had 
not pushed me against the booth, you would not now be 
reading this book: therefon* be thankful for all that ha])- 
pened. llelieve nu‘, everything in the world is good, as 
it is, and those discontented men who an‘ always full o1 
c.om])laiiits ai’c md my friends. Then* you have Buss(‘- 
linck and Waterman... ; but 1 must go on, for I hav(‘ to 
finish my book before the gr(*at Sjiring (.’otfi*e Aiu'tion. 'fo 
speak the truth — for I like truth — I felt it very unpleasant 
to meet that person again. 1 saw in a iiioiiient that Ik‘ 
was not an acipiaintance to be j)roud of He lookerl very 



MAX lIAVKLAAli. 


19 


palo, and when 1 asked him what (/clock it was, he 
didn’t know ! These thinji^s a man observes who has fre- 
quented the Exchange for twenty years or so, and trans 
acted business tliere. 1 ’ve witnessed many a crash. 

T tliought lie would turn to the right, and therefore 1 
went to the left; but, lo, h(‘ too turned to tlie left, and so 
I was in for a conversation with him; but 1 bore in mind 
that he did not know what o’clock it was, and perceivtMl 
at the same tiiiu^ that his coat was buttemed up to his 
chin, which is a very ]>ad sign, so I did not speak much. 
lli‘ told me that he had Ikhmi in India, that he was 
niarri(‘d, and had cliildrmi. All very wx*l] ; but tliis was 
net very interesting to me. At the Kain'lstafj}- -I never 
liefore wont through tluit .sAvy ,2 b(‘cause it is not con- 
sidered respectal)l(\ — but this time I intended to turn to 
the right, and pass through the, Ivapelsteeg, -I waited till 
that little strei‘t was just behind us, to makt* him under- 
stand that his way was straight on, and tlien 1 said very 
politely — for 1 am always ixdite : oiu' never knows 
whidher he may not afterwanls want to use a per 
son : — “ 1 Jim V(‘ry much pleased tluit I have semi you 
jigjiin, Sir, ...and. ..and, good bye... I liave to go tliis way.” 
Then he looked like Jin idiot at me and sighed, and all 
of a smhhai took hold of one of the buttons of my 
eoat...“ /A’ur Drvstubble." said he, “ I have to ask you 
something.” 

‘ -- nuttrrtly Lain*. 


‘ Stif ij -- l.ano. 



20 


MAX HAVELAAK. 


I trembled all over. He did not know wliat o’clock it 
was, and had to ask mo something ! Of course I replied 
that “I had no time to spare, and had to go to the 
Exchange,” though it was evening; — but if you have 
frequented the Exchange for some twenty years... and a 
person asks you something without knowing wliat o’clock 
it is... I disengaged tlie button, bade him farewell in a 
polite manner— for I am alwaj^s polite — and went throiigli 
the Kapelsteeg, which I otherwise never do, because it is 
not fashionable, and foshionaldcncss I like above all things. 
I hope tliat nobody saw me. 



CHAPTER 111. 

The following day, when I came homo from the Ex- 
cliangc, Fred told me that somehody liad called to speak 
to me. According to the description it was Shawlman. 

How could he have found me out oh, yes, I see, the 

card ! 

This made me think of taking my children away from 
school, for it is very anno 3 dng to be troubled twenty or 
tliirty years afterwards by a school- companion who wears 
a shawl instead of a coat, and wlio docs not know' wdiat 
o’clock it is. I have also forbidden Fred to go to the 
Wi'ster ilarket wdien there arc booths. 

Next day I received a letter wdth a large parcel. I 
began at once to read : 

“ Dear DuvsTuimLE !” [I think he ought to have WTit- 
ten ' Sir,* because I am a broker.] “ Ye.storday 1 called 
“ at your house with the intention of asking you a favour. 
“ 1 believe you are in good circumstances” — [that is true; 
w’e are thirteen of us in our t>llice], — “ ami 1 should like 
" to use your credit to bring about a matter of great ini- 



22 


MAX llAVKf.AAlJ. 


“ portance to mo.” — [Should you not think that he would 
rather have given me a commissioij for the Spring Auc- 
tion?] — “Through many misfortunes I stand somewliat 
“ in need of money.” — [Somewliat ! lie had no shirt on his 
back; this is what he calls somewhat !]—“ I cannot give 
“ my dear wife everything that is necessary to make life 
“ agreeable, and the education of my children is, from 
“ pecuniary impediments, not as I should like it to be.” — 

[To make life agreeable ? education of children ^ 

Do you think that he wislu's to take a season ticket for 
his wife at the opera, and place his children in a 
gviiiiiasium at Geneva ? It was autumn, and very cold, 
— he lived in a garret, and witlanit fin*. When 1 rec(*ived 
that letter I was ignorant of this, but afterwards I went 
to him, and I am still angry at tin* foolish styli* of his 
letter. What the deuce!- Whoever is poor may say 

it ; there must lu* j)oor p('o))le ; that is necessary in 

society. If he do(*s not a.sk charity, if In* annoys nobody, 

I don't care Ibr his jioverty, but di.sguising the matter is 
very im])rop(*r. Xow, h‘t us see what mon; he has to 
say.] — “As I am obliged to jirovide for my hous(*hold, I 
“ have n.'solved to makn* usi* of a talent which, as I be- 
“ lieve, I am in ]io.sse.ssi<m of. I ajii a poet - — [Pshaw! 
you know, read(*r, how I and all ivasonable nnui think 

about that] “ ami writer. Since, childhood I have 

“ e.\'])res.sc(l my feelings in verse, ami afterwards, too, 1 
always wrote (lown in p(»etry the s(*nNatioijs of my soul. 



MAX IIAVKIAAK. 


23 


'' I believe that I have made some valuable pieces, and I 
“ want a publisher for them. This, then, is the difficulty. 

1 am unknown to the ])ublic, and tlic publishers judge 
'' of works more according to the reputjition of the author 
“ than the value of the cont(‘nts.” — [Exactly as we judge 
of the coffee, according to the reputation of the trade- 
marks.] - 'Hie merit <d‘ my work can only be established 
'' l)y ])ubli( atii)n ; and the booksellers require payment in 
“ advance of all the (‘xpenscs”— [Tliere they arc quite 
right] ‘‘wliieh is at ju’escuit not convenient to me. 1 
“ am, howijver, so eonvineed tliat my book would clear 
“ th(* expenses, lliat I could j)h‘tlge my word for it, and 
“ as I am (‘iieouraged by our inert ing of the day before 
“ yesbu'day,” [That is wdiat In* calls being encouraged!] — 

‘‘ I have res<ilved t<j ask you to be surety for me to a 
“ bookst^ller tor the exp(‘nses of a first edition, even if it 
were only a small book. I give you tin* choice of works 
“ for tliat first ex])eriment. In the accomjvanying ]nircel 
“you will lind many manuseripts ; fr<»m which you will 
“ see that 1 have thought, worked, and experienced 
miKdi” [I never heard that he had any business at 
all]; “and if I am not a stranger to the tah‘nt of ox- 
“ pressing myself well, my ill success will not be due to 
“ anv want of im|)ressions. In hopi's ot a kind answer. 
“ I ri'inain vour old school fellow ’ [And he signed 
this with his name; but 1 make a secret of that, because 
I do not like to bring discredit on any one.] 



24 


MAX IIAVEI.AAK. 


Dear reader, you can understand how foolish I looked 
in being made all at once a broker in verses. I am quite 
sure that if Shawiman — so I will continue to call him 
— had seen me by daylight, he would not have dared 
to ask me such a favour ; for respectability and dignity 
cannot be concealed ; but it was evening, and therefore I 
don’t mind. 

Of course, I would have nothing to do with this non- 
sense. I should have returned the parcel, but that 1 
did not know where lie lived, and I heard nothing of 
liim. I thought that he was ill, or dead. Last week there 
was a party at the liosemoyers, wdio are sugar-brokers. 
Fred went out for the lirst time with us ; he is sixteen, 
and I think it right that a young man at that age should 
see something of the world ; otherwise he will go to th(5 
Wester Market, or somewhere else. The girls had been 
playing on the piano and singing, and .at dessert they 
teased each other about something th.at seemed to have 
happened in the front room while we played at whist 
in the back room — something in which Fred was con- 
cerned. 

Yes, yes, Louise,” said Letsy Kosemeyer ; “ you did 
cry. Papa, Fred made I/)uise cry.” 

My wife said that Fred should not go out .again if he 
wa.s so uauglity ; slui thought that he had pinched 
Louise, 01 sometliiiig like that, which is n(;t [H’oper, ami 
1, too. mad(5 j>ic]>aratioii.^ to c:>ay a lew words about it, 



MAX IIAVKLAAK. 


25 


when Louise said : No, no, Fred was \o,ry kind ; 1 
sliould like him to do it again !" 

What then V* lie had not pinched her ; he had been 
reciting, tliat was all. Of course the mistress of the 
house likes to have some fun at dessert, — it enlivens the 
company. Mrs. lioscmcyer thought that what had made 
Louise cry would amuse us too, and therefore asked 
Fred, who was as red as a turkey-cock, to repeat it. 1 
could not und(irstand what he had done; I knew his 
whole* rt'pcrtuirCy which consisted of tlie “Wedding-Party 
of the Gods,” tlie books of tlie Old Testament in rhyme, 
and an episode from the “Wedding of Camacho,” which 
boys always like so much, because it is rather funny ; 
and what there was in all this that could make any one 
i;ry was a riddle to me. ; it is true, a girl of that age 
wee})s very soon. — “ Conu*, Fred ! Please do !” — and Fred 
b(*gan. As 1 do not like to stretch the curiosity of the 
reader, I will here at once stiite, that before heaving home 
they had opiMied Shawlinan’s ])arcel, and Fred and Mary 
had i)icked out of it a piece of sentimentality, which 
afterwards gave me a great deal of trouble. This book 
owes its existence to that parcel, and in due time I will 
account for it (juite becomingly; for I like to make it 
known that 1 love truth, and am a g()od man of business. 

- [Last and Co., collee-brokers, at No. 37 Laurim’ Canal.] 
Fred recited a thing full of nonsense. A young man 
\vi'oti‘ t(» bis mother that he had bei ii in love, and that 



20 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


his sweetheart had married another — [there she was quite 
right I think] — yet that he nevertheless always loved his 
mother very mucli. Is that statement true or not ? 
Do you think so many words are wanted to say that ? 
At all events I had eaten a piece of bread and cheese, 
and nearly finislied my second pear, before Fred finished 
his story. But Louise cried again, and the ladies said 
that it was very beautiful. 

Then Fred, who, I ])elieve, thought he had luonght out a 
masterpiece, told tliem that he found it in a i)arcel sent 
to my house by the man witli tlie sliawl ; ami I explained 
to the gentlemen how that ha])]K*ned, but 1 said notliiiig 
about the Grecian girl, because Fred was j)re.sent, neither 
did I speak of the Kapelsti'eg. Eviny one thought tliat 
it was ([uite right on my part to gel rid of tliat man. 
Presently you will see that tliere were oth(*r tilings in th(‘ 
parcel of more solid worth, some of which will ajqx'ar 
in this book, because they eoneern tin* cotlee-auetions of 
the Company. 

Afterwards, the publislier asked im^ wlu'ther I would 
not add to tlie work the pi(.*ce or poem which Fred had 
recited. I consented, but 1 wish it to known that I 
am not responsible for tla.* sentiments expressi^d. All stulf 
and non.sen.se. However, I withhold my observations 
from want of s[iace. I will only remark that the [loeni 
wa:. written at “ 1*aoan<;,” in 1813, and that this is of 
inferior mark — I mean the J^ldang (;olh.‘e : - 



MAX lIAVELAAll. 




! ’k ben wel ver van ’t laii<l, 
Wiliir iiiij ’t K'veu word {'osichonkt;!!, 
Waar luiji.c tniniMi blonkcu, 

Waar ik ()j*\vic'S jiaii u\v Iiaiul ; 

Waar u\v iiiocdcrtrouw (Ilt ziel 
\'aii (U-u kua ip liaar zurjieti \vij<ldi; 

I'jj liiMii liordrijk stolid ter /.ijdt*, 

Kii lii'iii opliiid’ als hij vi.d ; 
S('liijnbaar sdunirdt* ’t lot di* baiiden, 
Dir ons boiidoii, wi’tH'd van vvn, . . . 
'k Sla birr N\id aan vrcciiide strandm 
Met iiiij /t‘ir, t*u (bnl . . . atlrcn, . . . 

Maar torh, iinn'drr, >vat im- Lirirtdi*. 

Wat iiiiJ vnoii^^d Lrat’ ct \»'idnrt, 
Mni-di-r ! twijtV-1 aan do lietdr, 

Aan bet liait in\.s li^■^lin;^^s nirt ! 

’1 l.s iiaainvlijks twoo j>aar jaren, 
'r<)on ik ’t laat^t j^indsolirii i:rond 
Zwij;j:( ud aan dm oi-\rr stmd 
Oin do li'okoni>t in to staron ; 

'rnon ik ’I •'oliouiu* tot inij rirj» 

Dat ik \an dio torkoinsl w.irbtti* 

Kn bi t licdrii stout Muaibttr 
Kii mil t»aradi|/rn x bifi* , 


Toon, door alio stoornis been 
Die zidi opdeod voor niijn sclner-u, 

't Dart zioli koen ecu \nt\ve;j; liaaiide, 
En zich di’oomeiid zalij^ waande . . . 

Maar dio tijd, binds *t laatbt vaarwvl 
Hoo i^o/wintl ons ook onttogen, 
Onbrvatbaar Idiksonisnel, 

Als een sobiin voorbijgevlogen, . . , 
O, bij liot in *t V(X'>r\vaartsgaan, 
Diopo, diopo sporon staan ! 

’k 1‘nu‘tdo vrmgilc en smart met eon, 
’k Hob gedachl en ‘k lieb gestreden, 

’k Deb gojuii'bt t*n 'k bobgobedon, . . . 
’t Is me als vlogen oeinvm been ' 

’k Dob naar lovm>beil gebtroel'd. 

’k lieb gevonden m verlori-n, 

Kn, oi-n kind nog kort to ymvou, 
daren in r.-n unr donrloefvi. . . . 

'k Mimlo eon meisje. Ibrl mijn leveu 
S'been mij dinu' die lietde soboon ; 
'k Zag in baar eon oorekia'on, 

Als een eindb'on van mijn streven, 

Mij door tb'd ton dool goge\on ; 

Zabg doi^r don reinm si'bat. 



28 


MAX IIAVELAAR. 


Die Zijn zorg nilj tocgcwogcn, 

Die Zijn giiiist geschonken had, 
Dankto ik met con traan in do oogcn ; . . . 

Liefdc was met godsdicnst «ien, 

Ell 't gemoed, dat opgetugen, 

Dankend opstecg tot den lloogeii 
Dankte en had voor haar allecn ! . . . 

Zorgen baardc mij die liefdc, 

Onrust kwclde mij bet hart, 

En OTidraaglijk was de smart, 

Die mij ’t week gemoed doorgricfde. 

’k Heb slechts angst en Iced gegaerd, 
Waar ik ’t hoogst gerot verwachttc, 

En voor ’t lieil waarnaar ik traclitte, 
Was mij gif en v/ee hewaard. . . . 

'k Vond genot in ’t lijdend zwijgen ! 

’k Stond standvastig hopend daar ; 
Uiispoed deed den prijs mijstijgcn, . . . 

'k Droeg en Iced zoo graag voor haar ! 
’k Tehle ramp iioch on.spocdsslagen, 
Vrengde scliiep ik in verdriet, 

Alles, alles wildc ik dragen, . . . 
Ihiofde ’t lot mij haar slechts uict. 

• * ♦ « 

Wat is min die cons hr/jorif 
Dij do liefdc nitt hot Icvcn 
t Kind door Uo«l in ’t hart gedrevcri 
Toon hot nog uiot staam’len k<m ? . . . 
Tool het UAitL di' niocdi '/ fjorat , 


Naaiiw den mocdcrschoot onttogen, 

’t Eersto vocht vond voor don dorst, 
't Eerste licht in Mocdcroogcn ? . . . 

Necn, geen band die vaster hindt, 
Vaster barton houdt omsloten, 

Dan de band, door Ood gesloton, 
Tusschen ’t moederhart en 't kind 
En ceil hart, dat zoo zich hcchtte 
Aan bet schooii, dat even bloiik, 
Dat mij niets dan doornen schunk, 
En geen eiikel bloom] »je vlcclitte, . . . 

Zon datulj'dc hart ile trouw 
Van bet inoedcihart vorgoteii ; 

En de liefdc van de vrouw, 

Die inijne eersto kindorkreten 
Ojiving ill ’t hezorgd gemoed, -- 
Die mij, als ik weende, suste, 
Truaiitjcs van dc wangen kusle, . . . 
Die inij vocdtle met liaar blocd ? . . . 

’k Den bier ver van wat bet Icvcn 
Uiiuls ons zoets en seboons kan gi'ven ; 

En ’t genot van «l’ oorslc jougd, 
Vaak geroernd en liong ge]»rezcn, 

Kan wel bier mijn deel niet wezeii ; 

't Kenzaam barte kenl geen vrongd. 
Steil en doornig zijn mijn paden, 
Orisj»oed dnikt mij diej) ter neCr, 

En de last mij <;pgcla<len 
Knelt iuo,emloet bet hart mi j zeer; 
I.aat bet slechts mijn tr.nien tuigen, 



MAX ITAVELAAK. 


29 


Alfl zoo menig mocd’loos uur 
Me in den boczcm der Natuur, 

't IToofd zoo trcnrig neer doctbuigcn,... 

Vaak als niij de moe<l ontzoiik, 

Is de zuclit inij schicr ontvloden : 

“ Va<ler ! sclienk niij bij de dooden, 
Wat liet Icvcn inij niet Rclionk ! — 
Vader ! gecf nio aan gene 
Als do mond dcs doods mij kust,— 


Va<lcr ! gcef me aan gene zijdc 
Wat ik hier niet sniaakto . . . rust 1 ” 
Maar, bestervend op mijn lippen, 
Stecg die bee niet tot den lleer, . . . 
'k Roog wel bet mijn knieen ncer, — 
’k Voeltie wel een zucht me ontglip- 
pen,- 

Maar liet was ; '^^no(j niet, o Ilccr / 
G^f mij eerst mijn moeder wcCrT’ 


[The translator ventures with great diirulence, for he knows 
liow niueh Ix'auty and tenderness have bcoi: lost in the trans- 
lation, to give an English version of the Poem.] 


0 mother dear, 1 'in far from lioin*'. 
The land tliat gave mo liirtli : 

All hopeless uiul forlorn I roam, 

A stranger upon earth. 

Twas in that homo the dewy te.ar 
First glistenoil in mine eyes, 

Thy gentle haml dispelletl my fear : 

A mother’s love ne’er dies' 

’d'was there thy faithful soul watched 
Thy helple.s.s little child, jo'er 
(1 Hiding the feet untiied before. 

With word and h'ok so mild. 


lint Destiny do'^troyed the band 
That j(dnod us two in one ; 

And now upon a foriiL;'n stiaud 
1 am, with Cod, alone ' 

Thy li>vo, my mother ilcar, docs ''till 
In sorrow and in joy, 

With undiminished aulour till 
The heart of thy loved boy. 

At home, ’tis scarce four years ago,— 
1 stand npon the shore, 

And think I we in iutuve scenes, 
Ucautu-N unknown before 



MAX IIAVKLAAH. 


:m) 

At once tlie present I despise, 

And dreaming, think me blest : 

I make myself a Paradise, 

Regardless of the rest. 

f said farewell : I rue it now : 

’Twas all that phantom scene. 

Which disappeared so soon ! 0 how 
Deluded I have been ! 

And time which fled with lightning’s 
Deep traces left behind : [wing, 

It dried up the affections’ S 2 )ring- 
Destroyed my peace of mind. 

I 'vc testcfl joy, I ’ve tested grief, 

I’ve thought, and I have striven, 

With earnest jirayer have sought relief, 
But still I’m tempest-driv^'ii. 

I ’ve striven after bliss in life, 

I ’ve found and lost the j)Ower : 

I am a child grown old in strife— 
Whole ages in an hour. 

O mother dear, will you believe 
(God knows that I lie not), 

0 mother dear, as truth receive. 

That you are not forgot. 

1 loved a girl who seemed to be 
A treasure from on high, 

By God Almighty given me, 

I knew not how or why. 


And Him I thanked with hajipy tears, 
For making her my own. 

My sighs were lost in transient joy, 

I prayed for her alone. 

Yet love induced a weight of care. 
And trouble filled my breast ; 

I found but 2 ^ain and sorrow there. 
Where I had looked for rest ! 

* 

I suffered gladly for her sake, 

In sorrows doubly dear 

No sacrifice but I would make 
So fate would h'ave her here ! 

Her image rooted in my heart, 

Till life’s last sigh shall stand. 

When v'c shall Join no more to part 
In her dear fatherland. 

But what is such a blighted love, 

To that Avith life begun - 

A love imjdanted from above - 
Th’ affection of a son ? 

The babe just taken from the womb, 
Draws from its mother’s eyes 

Aliglit to guide; bimthronghtijjj gloom 
That all around him lies. 

He draw.s from out his mother’s breast 
A stream that gives him life : 

H<t faithfulness insures his rest, 
Brote< ts fiv)m early strife ' 



MAX IIAVKLAAIJ. 


:u 


She treasures up liis childisli freaks, 
And soothes him when lie cries, 
Kisses the tears from off his cheeks 
With love that never dies ! 

0 motlier dear, will you believe 
Your son <loes love you yet ? 

O mother dear, will you bedieve 
Your son does not forget ? 

I’m far away from all but thought 
Of yonder belter sjthere ; 

The joys of early youth I ’ve sought : 
I cannot find them here. 

My lonely heart for ever mourns : 

I’m burdened heavily ; 

My paths olist rinded with the thorns 
Of long adversity. 

In Nature’s bosom oft have I 
l.et fall a Hood of tears ; 


And even oft been heard to sigh, 

When overwhelmed with fears 

“ 0 Father, give me with the dead, 
What, living. I’m denied : 

O Father, streteh-^ie on the bed 
Whereon my loved one died ! 

'' O Father, give me at their side. 

Of all thy gifts the best— 

O Father, give me at their side, 

What here I yearn for — Rest ! ” 

But this rebellious hopeless sigh. 
Scarce uttei t d, died away ; 

It went not up to God on high, 

And I knelt down to pray 

Not yet, my Father, take me hence, 
Though (piivering on tlie raide— 

0 take me not, my Father, hence ; 
But give my mother back 1 ” 



CnAPTER TV. 


Before I on, I must tell you lliat young Mr. Stern 
lias come ; he is a good ft'llow. lie seems to bo nctivc and 
clever, but I believe that lie — as tlie (fcrmans call it, 
'' SchuxirmV Mary is thirteen. Ilis outfit is very nice, 
and lie has got a copybook, in which to practise the Dutch 
style. I wonder whether J shall soon receive an order 
from LudAvig Stern. Mary shall embroider a pair of 
slippers for him, — I mean to say for young Mr, Stern. 

Busselinck and Waterman have made a mistake, a 

respectable broker does not supplant, that’s what I say. 
The day after the party at the Roserneyers, w'ho are 
sugar-merchants, I called Fri^d, and ordenjd him to fetch 
Shawdman’s parcel. You must know^ reader, that 1 am 
very precise in my family as to Religion and Morality. 
Now then, yesterday evening, just wlicn I wa.s eating niy 
first pe»ar, I read in the face of one of the girls that there 
was .something in a verse from the parced that wna not 
right, r myself had not listened, but I saw that Bet.sy 
crumbled her bread, and that Avas enough for me. You 



will perceive, reader, that 1 am a man of tlie world. 1 
made Fred hand over to me “the* h('auiifid poem” of 
yesterday evening, and very soon saw the line whicdi caused 
Detsy to crumhhi her bread. They sp(*.ak th(M*o of a child 
on the breast of its mother, T say nothing of that but : 

which scarcely hTt the motluiFs womb,” that I disa[) 
])roved, - to speak about that, I mean, - so did my wife. 
Mary is thirteen. Of “cabbage”^ and such things w('. do 
not sp(‘ak ; but to give all in this way its right nanui is 
jiut necessary, as I am a great lover of morality. 8o 1 
made Fred, who knew it by heart, promise that he would 
not repeat it again, — at least not before he was membej* of 
Doctrina,^ hecause no young girls conics the m,- and tluai I 
put it in my writing-de‘sk, 1 nu‘-an the verse. Ihit L wanted 
to know whetiuu’ then*, was anything else of an offensives 
nature in the* paree*! ; I be'gan to look and to iiisp(^c.jt every 
thing, r coulel not read all, for a great deal was written in 
fe)r<*ign languages which I did not understand, but at last 
r caught sight of a treatise entitleel “ Account of tlm Coffee 
Culture in the Kesidency of Menado.” My heart leaptid 
for joy, because 1 am a coffee broker, at No. 37 Lauri(‘v 
Canal, and Menado” is a very good mark. 8u this Shawl 
]nan, who made imnunal verses, had been in the CofhM^ 
trade. I looked at the parcel with quite a dilferent eye. I 
saw treatises in it which 1 did not comph*tely understand, 
hut they showed a knowledge of hiisiness. There were 

^ S(M* ])ago .‘t “ A in Aiustndam. 



34 


MAX UAVELAAR. 


statements, proljlems, computations, wliich I could not 
understand at all, and everytliing was done with so much 
care and exactness, tliat I, to speak plainly,— for I am a 
lover of truth,— thought this Shawlman, if perhaps tlie 
third clerk left, — a likely event, as he is old and didl,- 
could very well take his place. Of course I sliould lilce, 
first of all, to have testimony as to his honesty, religion, 
and respectability, for I will not take anybody into my 
office until I am satislied on these })oints. Tliis is a fixed 
principle with me. You have seen it in my letter to 
Ludwig Stern. 

I did not care to show Lred that I began to take an 
interest in tlie contents of llie parcel ; and therefore 1 
made him go away. I grew quite dizzy when I took in 
hand one treatise after another, and read tlie titles. It is 
true, there were many verses among them, but also much 
that was useful, and I was astonished at the variety of 
the different subjects. I acknowledge- for I love truth 
— tliat I, who have always been engaged in the coflee trade, 
am not in a position to criticise ; but without going so far 
as criticLsing, lean pronounce the list of the different titles 
curious enough. As I liave told you the history of the 
Greek, you know that in my youth I was taught Latin, 
and though I avoid quotations in my correspondence- 
which would not be right in a broker’s oflice— yi*t I thought, 
on seeing all these things : “ l)e omnibus alicpiid, de toto 
nihil,” or Multa non multum.” 



MAX HAVELAAH. 


35 


Yet I said this mere uut of anger, and a desire to speak 
ill Latin of all this learning before me, than because 1 
meant it. For if I examined something or other for a 
time, I was bound to confess that the author appeared to 
know all about it, and liad even a great deal of sound argu- 
ment in support of his opinions. I found in the parcel 
treatises and disquisitions — 

On the Sanscrit, as the Mother of the Teutonic Lan- 
guages ; 

On the Punishment of Infanticide ; 

On the Origin of the Nobility ; 

Oil the Difference between the Ideas : Infinite time/’ 
and Eternity 

On the Theory of Chances ; 

On the Hook of Job — (there was something else about 
Job ; but in verse) ; 

On the Protcine in the Atmospheric Air ; 

On Eussiaii Politics ; 

On the Vowels ; 

On the Cellular Prisons ; 

On the Ancient Hypotheses ; 

Of the '' Iloiror meuif 

On the Desirableness of the Abolition of Punishments 
for Slander ; 

On the Causes of the Revolt of the Dutch against Spain, 
not being the Desire for Religious or Political Free- 
dom ; 



3G 


MAX HAVKLAAK. 


Oil lY^potiial tlu' j^<[iinriiig of the Circle, niul 

the Extraction of tlic S(piar(' IJooi of Surd*^ ; 

Oil tlic Poiulcraliilit y of Light ; 

On tlic Decline of Civilisation since the Coinni(Mic(^ 
incut of Cliri.dianity; 

On th(* ^Iytli(>logy of Iceland ; 

On the EniiJe of lunisscau ; 

On Sirius as tlio Ccnitre of the Solar Systcun ; 

On Import Ihitic^s as Csoless, I nd(‘lieat(‘, rnjust, and 
Immoral — (of tliis I liad never ln'ard hefore) ; 

On Veise as tlu' Most Anci(‘nt Language - (tins I do not 
believe) : 

On Wliite Ants ; 

On tlie T"nnaturalw(‘ss of Schools ; 

On Hydraulic .Mattcn* in connexion Avitli llicaj Cultnr<‘ ; 

On tile A}>]nirent Aseendeiu'y ot‘ lh(' W(‘st(‘rn Civilisa 
tion ; 

On tli(' Price of Java (.'ollee — (this \ liav(‘ put aside) ; 

Cii tile S('cret Societies of the Chim‘S(*, etc. etc. etc. 

And this was not all. I lound, luG to speak of tlu^ veives 
- wliich Avere in ,all languages many small treatises hav 
ing no tithi ; lomanc'-s in Malay, war songs in .lavanese, 
and vliat not. I lound also letters, many of tliein in lan- 
guages which I did nf»t nmhu’stand. Some were diri'cted 
to him, others written ly him, or were only copi(‘s ; hut 
“vidmitly made for some ]>ariicular [)nrpos(^ ; for all were 
signed ly other persons, who testified that th(*y agreed with 



MAX lUVKLAAIf. 


37 


tLe original. I saw also (‘xtracis fnjin (liari(.‘s, notes and 
ilioiiglits at random — some very mucli so. 1 Lad, as 1 said 
l)eforc, laid aside some treatises, because it appeared to me 
that they Avould bo useful in my business, and 1 live for 
my business ; — but 1 must confess that 1 was at a loss to 
know what to do with the rest. I could not ndurri him the 
parcel; for I did not know where he lived. It was open 
iKJW. 1 could not deny that I had looked at the contents 
— [and 1 sliould not have (Uniied it, being so fond of truth], 
— bo(?aus(‘ 1 had tried in vain to do it u[) exactly as it had 
been Ixdbre. jVIoreover, 1 could not dissemble that some 
dissertations on Coffee intercssbul me, and that I should 
like to make some use of tlunu. Eveiy day I read here 
and there some pages, and became, more and more con- 
vinced that the author must hav(^ been a coflee-broker, t(j 
become so com])l(itely accpiaintixl with all ^ort of things 
in the world. 1 am (juite sure that the lioscmeyers, who 
trade in sugar, havi^ not acipiired such extensive know- 
ledge. 

Now r feared that this Shawlinan would drop in uiiex- 
})(ictedly, and again have .something to tell me. I was 
now very soriy that T went that evening through the 
Ka])elsteeg, and now felt the iiiipro])riety ol‘ passing 
through unfashionalde streets. Of course, if he had conic 
he would have asked me tor some money, and would have 
spoken of his parcel. 1 should perhaps have given him 
something, and if he had sent me the following day the 



38 


MAX IIAVELAAK. 


mass of MSS., it would have been my legal property. 
Then I should liavc separated the wheat from the chaff ; 
I should have singled out what I wanted for my book, 
and should liave Imvned, or thrown into the waste-basket, 
all the rest. This I could not do now ; for if he returned, 
I should have to produce his property, and lie, seeing that 
I was interested in a couple of treatises of his, would veiy 
soon have been induced to ask too high a price; — for 
notliing gives more ascendency to the seller than the 
discovery that the buyer stands in need of his \vares. 
Such a jiosition is therefore avoided as much as possibles 
by a merchant wlio understands his business. 1 have 
another idea, previously mentioned, which may prove how 
a person who frerpients the Exchange may yet lie open to 
humane impressions ; — it was this : Bastianus, that is the 
third clerk, who is becoming so old and stupid, has not of 
late been at the of lice more than twenty- five days out of 
tlie tliirty; and when Ik* docs come, he often does his 
work very badly. As an honest man, I am obliged to 
consult the interests of the firm — La.st and Co. since tlu^ 
Meyers have retired — to see that every one does his work ; 
for I may not throw away out of mistaken ])ity, or (excess 
of sensibility, the money of the firm. This is my priii- 
eiple. I would rather give that Bastianus three guilders ^ 
out of my own ])ocket, than eontimie to pay him every 
year seven hundred guilders which Ik* does not ileserva*. 


* Pi VC shilling.s. 



MAX IIAVELAAIJ. 


39 


1 have calculated that this man has drawn during the 
thirty-four years of his service— as well from Last and 
Co., as formerly from Last and Meyer, but tlie Meyers 
have left — the sum of nearly fifteen thousand guilders 
(£1250), and that, for a man in his station, is a large 
sum ; which but few can command. He has no right to 
(jomplain. I came to this calculation through the treatise 
of Shawlman on multiplication. Tluit Shawlmaii writes 
a good hand, I thought he looked very poor, he did not 
know what o’clock it was — how would it do, I thought, 
to give him the situation of Bastianus? I should tell 
liim in that case, that it would be his duty to “ SIR me. 
lliat he would know without telling, I hope ; for a servant 
cannot call his superior by name, or lie would catch it. 
He could commence with four or five hundred guilders a 
year.^ Bastianus had to work many years before he got 
seven hundred,^ and I shall then have performed a good 
deed. Yes, with three hundred guilders he could very 
well commence, for from his inexperience he would, of 
course, consider the first year as an apprenticeship, Avhich 
would l^e quite right; for he cannot be equal to old 
hands ; I am quite sure that he will bo content with two 
hundred guilders. 

But I was not easy about his conduct he had on a 

shawl ; and, moreover, I don’t know wliere he lives. 

A few days afterwards young Mr. Stern and Fred at- 
1 £30 to £10. 2 ^'53 ojjs. 



40 


MAX IIAVKLAAII. 


temlud a book aiiclioii at an holol, ilu' “ Wapeii van 
Jku*n/’ I had forbidden Vwi] to buy anythin'*'; l)iit Storn, 
wlio has ])lenty ot iiionov, bronolit lioinc sojiu^ rubbish: 
that’s Jiis biisiiK^ss. Ifo\vi‘V(U‘, Frod brouuht lUiws, that 
lio had scHui SliaAvljuan, who ap]H'ar(‘d to l)o cinployijd at 
tlio auction, in takinci' tlu* l)ooks from tlie sludvos, and 
fdviiiL!’ tliciii if) t])(‘ auctioneer. Fred said lliat lie looked 
very jiale, and that a ^uvnthunan, who seiuiuMl to have the 
directi(ai tlieiv, had ,erowl(‘d at him, for lettiiiL*- fall a, 
couple of c(im])h'te volumes of the “ A^laja ^ it was, 
ind(‘(M], \'(U’V clumsy <d’ him to dama^^e such charmin^^ 
ladies’ liooks. Jn the course ol’ the scolding, Frcal lusird 
tliat lie j^ot tirt('en ]umce a day. “ Do you tliink that I 
iiiteiul to j^iv(‘ you tifteeii ]»mice a day tor not bin, l; ("' were 
the ji'entlenian’s words. I calculated that (ii'temi pimcc* a 
day, Sundays and holidays not included, otherwisi* la* 
Would liave sjiokeii of so much a month or so much a 
year, niaki* two hundred and twenty tivo yuildeiv, a year.- 
I am (jui( k in my decisions a man wlm has been in laisi 
iK'Ss for so Iona a time, knows immeilialely wliat to do, 
and the followino mornin;4 1 c.dlc'l on ( iaafzuiLteivMhe 
bookseller who had held the auction. I askcil for the 
man who had let fall the “ Ayhija.” lie had liis dismis 
sal,’’ said (Jaat/nii^er ; “he was idle, conc.riied, and sickly.” 

' “ 'I4ie for it'iildi.slifd ;ii 

" COS, l."i . 

' “ < , ;i \«Ty « n;mj< ; (iuiif - laldil, ol 

ii'Uim’, < 111 low iii» I it. , .ii'i'i'r-, 



MAX IIAVKLAAi;. 


il 


I bouglit il 1)()x of wafers, and resolved iinincdiately to 
give rjastiaiiiis aiiotlier trial; I could not make up my 
mind to turn an old man so im(‘X])ectedly upon tlie 
streets. To be strict, but, where it is possible, forbc^aring, 
has ever been my principle, yet I never lose an o})por 
lunity of getting information which may be of use in 
business, and tliereforc I asked Gaafzuiger where this 
Shawlman livcil. He gave me the address, and 1 put it 
down. 1 pondered over the book to be brought out ; but 
as I like the truth, 1 must tell you plainly that 1 did not 
know liow to manage it. One tiling is ({iiite sure : the 
materials which 1 found in Shawlman’p parcel v ere im- 
portant to cotfe(3-brokers. The only cp.iestion was, how to 
arrange the materials in a proper way ; every broker 
knows how imjiortant is the right sorting of the parcels. 
But to write, exccipt (3orrespondenc(‘ with Priiici])als,” ^ 
is rather out of my line, and yet 1 felt that T mud write ; 
because the future of the trade depended on it. The in 
ibrmation which 1 derived from that parcel of Sliawlman, 
is not such as J.ast and Co. can exclusively jirotit by; 
otherwise any one will understand that 1 should not take 
the troulile to have a book printed for Busselinck and 
Waternuui’s advantage ; because whoever lielps a rival in 
business is a fool ; — this is a fixed ])rinci})l(; with me. No, 
1 saw that danger menaced the whole colfee market - a 
danger that could only be av(‘rted by the united forces 
^ 1 . 



42 


MAX HAVELAAJ^ 


of all the brokers ; but even these might be iiisuftieient, 
and the sugar-refiners and indigo-merchants might have 
to help. 

And thinking it over while I write, it seems to me that 
shipowners too are in some measure interested in it, and 
the commercial marine 

Certainly, that is true ; sail-makers also, and ministers 
of finance ; overseers of the poor, and other ministers ; 
pastry-cooks, and shopkeepers ; women, and shipbuilders ; 
wholesale merchants, and retail dealers, and gardeners. — 

Tt is curious how thoughts run on when writing, — my 
book concerns also millers, clergymen, vendors of Hollo- 
way’s pills ; liquor-distillers, tile-makers, and those who 
live on the national debt ; i)umpmakers, and rope-makers ; 
weavers, and butchers ; brokers’ clerks, and shareholders 
in the Dutch Trading Company; in fact, on eonsid(*ration, 

all other persons the King too — yes, the King more 

than any ! My book must go through(nit the world. 

There is no help for it 1 do not care if Busselinck 

and Waterman read it 1 am not envious ; but they 

are old women and sneaks, that’s my opinion. I said the 
same this morning to young Mr. Stern, when I introduced 
liim at ‘'Artis : ” ^ he may write home about it. 

So it was, that a few days ago, 1 didn’t know what to 
<lo with my book, but Fred showed me a way out of the 
dilemma. 1 did not tell him so, because I do not think 
' Soo note, pago 4. 



MAX HAVELAAl?. 


43 


it right to show anybody that I am under an obligation 
to him ; that is a principle of mine, and a true one. He 
said, that Stern was such a clever fellow, that he made 
rapid progress in the Dutch language, and that he had 
translated Shawlman’s German verses into Dutch. You 
see, the Dutchman had written in German, and the Ger- 
man translated into Dutch ; if each had stuck to his own 
language, much trouble would have been spared. But, I 

tliought, if 1 have my book written by this Stern 

when I have anytliing to add, I can write a cliapter from 
time to time. Fred may also help — [he has a dictionary of 
difficulties]. Mary may write the fair copy, and this is a 
guarantee against all immorality ; for, you understand, 
that a respectable broker will not give anything into the 
liands of his daugliter that is contrary to Morals and 
llespectability. 

I spoke to the young people about my plan, and they 
liked it. Only Stern, who, like Germans in general, has a 
smattering of literature, wanted to have a share in hand- 
ling the subject. This I did not approve ; but because 
there would soon be a Spring Auction, and no order had 
yet come from Ludwig Stern, 1 did not like to o 2 )pose his 
wishes. So we agreed to the following conditions : — 

1. That he should contribute to the work every week 
two chapters. 

2. That I should make no alterations in his contribu- 
tions. 



MAX 1IAVI*:LAAIi’. 


4 I 

3. Tliat Fred .should eorrect the oraiinuatical orror.s. 

4. That 1 should ho at liberty to write from time io 
time a cliapter, to give tlie hook a respoctahhi ap])earaiice. 

5. Tliat the title should ho.: “ Th(^ Coffee Auctions of 
the Dutch Trading Comj)any.” 

G. That IMary should maki' the fair co[)y for tlu^ ])res,s ; 
but that we should have ])atience with lu*r on washing- 
(lay. 

7. That a conijilete (‘ha])ter should be ri‘ad every wc^ek 
at our party. 

8. That all immorality should Ix' avoided. 

9. Tliat my name should not appear on the title pagi‘, 
becausi* 1 am a broker. 

10. That Stern should he at lilMuty to ])ublish (huauaii, 
French, and English translations ol‘ my book, b(‘eaus(', as 
he asserted, such w'orks are better undm'.stood in Ibrcugn 
countries tlian at home. 

11. That 1 sliould send Shawlinan jiapei*, pens, and iid<. 

-[Stern insisted very much on this.] 

1 agreed to everything, for I wanted to iinish the book. 
Stern was ready the following morning with his first ehaj) 
ter, — and herc^ r(iad(‘i', tin? (piestion is answertvl, how it 
was that a coffee-broker —[Last and (’o., No. 37 Lauri(‘r 
Canal] — wi’otc; a borjk, something like a novel. 

Scarcely, however, had Stern commenced the work wlum 
diinculties arrestiid him. In acldition to the diflieulty of 
seh'cting an<l arranging the materials, la* m(4 with, ev(*ry 



MAX IIAYKLAAH. 


45 


moment, in tlie in ami scripts words and expressions wliicli 
lie did not understand, and which puzzled even me. These 
were often Javanese or.jMalay ; and abbreviations also oc- 
curred here and there, which we could not decipher. 1 
})erceivcd tliat we wanted Shawlmau ; and as 1 did not 
tliink it proper for a young man to fall into bad company, 
I would not send Stern or Fred to fetch him. 1 took some 
swc'.etmeats vWth me, which remained after the last party 
(for 1 always think about everything),'*' and 1 went in 
search of him. Ilis abode was certainly not brilliant ; 
but eipiality for all men, and of their houses too, is a 
chimera. He said so himself in his treatise about “ ITe- 
tensions to Happiness.’’ ^loreover, 1 do not like persons 
who are always discontented. It was in a back room in 
the Laiige-Leidsclu* Dwarsstraat. On the basement lived 
a marine store-k(‘epei‘, who sold all sorts of things, as cu])s, 
saucers, iuriiiture, old liooks, glasses, portraits of Van 
Speyk, and so on. 1 was A^ery anxious not to lireak any- 
thing, for sucli people always ask more money for the things 
tlian tliey are worth. A little girl was sitting on the steps 
before the house, and dressing her doll. 1 in(|uiretl if ^Ir. 
Shawlman lived there ; she ran away ; and her mother 
made her appearance. 

''Yes, sir, he lives here. Your honour has only to go 
upstairs, to the first lauding, then to the second, on to the 
third, and your lioiioiir is there. Minnie, go and say that, 
there is a gentleman come. Who can she say, sir?” I 



46 


MAX IIAVELAAK. 


said that I was Mr. Diystubble, cofiee-broker, at No. 37 
Laurier Canal, but that I should introduce myself. I 
mounted as high as they told me, and heard on the third 
landing the voice of a child singing, Papa will come soon, 
— sweet papa.” 1 knocked, and the door was opened by a 
woman or lady, — 1 did not know what to tliink of her. 
She looked very pale, and her features wore signs of 
fatigue. She made me think of my wife when washing- 
day is over. She was dressed in a long white gown or 
robe without waist-band, which descended to her knees, 
and was fastened in front with a black pin. Instead of 
a respectable skirt, she wore underneath a ])iece of dark 
linen covered with flowers, — which seemed to be wrapt 
round her body, hi})s, and knees very tightly. There was 
no trace of the folds, width, or amplitude becoming a 
woman. I was glad that 1 did not send Fred ; for her 
dress seemed to be extremely immodest, and the strange 
ness of it was still heightened by the gracefulness of lier 
movements, as if she thought herself quite riglit in this 
way, and seemed quite unconscious that she did not look 
like other women. I also perceived, that she was not at 
all perplexed at my arrival : she did not hide anytliiiig 
underneath the table, did not move tlie chairs, —in a word, 
she did not do as is generally done, when a stranger of 
respectable appearance arrives. 

She had combed lier hair ])ack like a Chinese, and bound 
it behiiid her head in a sort of knot. Afterwai’ds I heanl 



MAX IfAVELAAH. 


47 


that her dress is a sort of Indian costume, wliich they 
call there Sarmg and Kahaai, hut I thought it very ugly. 

“ Are you Shawlman’s wife ? ” I asked. 

“To whom have I tlie honour to speak?” she said, and 
that in a tone which seemed to me as if she meant that 
I might have said honour too. 

Now, I dislike compliments. With a “ Principal” it is 
a different thing, and T have been too long a man of busi- 
ness not to know my position, but to give myself much 
trouble on a third storey, I did not think necessary. So 1 
said briefly that I was Mr. Drystubble, coffee-broker, at 
No. 37 Laurier Canal, and that I wanted to speak to her 
husband. 

She pointed me to a little chair, and took a little girl 
on her lap, that was playing on the ground. The little 
boy whom 1 had overheard singing looked steadily at me, 
having viewed me from head to foot. He also, though 
only six years old, appeared to be not at all perplexed, 
lie was dressed in a very strange way, his wide trousers 
scarcely reached half-way down the thigh, and his legs 
were naked to the ankles. — Very indecent, I think. “Do 
you come to speak to papa ?” he asked all of a sudden; 
and I saw at once that he had been badly brought up, 
otherwise he would have said “ Sir.” But as I was a little 
out of countenance, and wanted to speak, I replied — 

Yes, my boy, I am here to speak to your papa ; do you 
think he will be in soon ? ” 



18 


MAX irAVKLAAl?. 


'' 1 don’t know. He went out to for nioiu^y to kny 
ino a box of colonivs.” 

'' ]>e f[niob niy boy,” said the 'woman. “ Po play 'witli 
your pictures or Avitb tlie pu])pet sbo\v.” 

Y(ni know, inamnia, that tliat gentleman took aM’ay 
(‘vorytliing yesterda^^” 

Tt appeared that “a gentleman ba<l Ixum there and taken 

away everytliing ” a d(*ligbtful visit! Tlie M^oman aj) 

]^eared to be in trouldti, for sc^endly slui wi[)ed aM’ay lier 
tears, whilst she brought the little girl to her brother. 

'‘There,” said slie, “play a little witli N'orniir '] — A 
strange luuiie. And so he did. 

“'Well, my good woman,” T asked; “do you ('.xp(‘et 
your husband ]m.‘S(‘iitly ?” 

“ T do not kiKjM',” she rc‘])li(.Ml. 

Tlieii IIk; litth* boy who had been ])laying M'ilh his sister, 
left her and asked mii : 

“ Sir, M'hy do you call mamma ‘ my good woman V" 

“What then, my boy T’ 1 said, “how must I address 
her?’ 

“ Well— as f)thers do. You should say ‘ my good 

w'oman’ to the 'wmjian b(d(nv, who sells .saiieers.” 

Xow I am a coffee-brokau* — Last and ( ’o., Xo. 37 Laurier 
Canal : Jire thirteen of us at the; olliecy and, including 

Stcan, who r(M*eiv(!S no salary, then* are lburt(*(‘n. Well, 
my wile is not Madam, and ought 1 to eall this creatuiv 
Madam ? That is im])os.sible; every one must remain in 



MAX IIAVELAAU. 


4i) 


lus own station besides, the bailiffs took away eveiy- 

thing. I thought “my good woman” quite right, and 
made no alteration. 

I asked why Shawlmau had not called on me to ask for 
his parcel ? She seemed to know it, and said that they 
had been to Bnissels, where he had worked for the “ IniM- 
pendance” but that he could not remain there, because his 
articles caused the Journal to be so often refused at the 
French frontiers ; that a few' days ago they had returned 
to Amsterdam, where Shawlman expected a situation. 

“That was certainly at Gaafzuiger’s ?” I asked. 

“ Yes, it was ; but that would not do,” she said. 

I knew more about it than she. lie bad lot the Aglaja 

fall, and was moreover idle, conceited, and poorly 

tlierefore they had turned him out “ And,” she went 

on, “that he would certainly come to me one of these 
days, and was, perhaps, just now going to my house to ask 
for a reply to his request.” 

I said that Shawlmau might come, but that he was not 
to knock, that being so troublesome for the servant ; if he 
waited for some time, I said, the door would certainly be 
opened, when somebody went out. And then I went 
away, and took my sweetmeats along with me; for, to 
speak the tratli, I did not like the place. I did not feel 
comfortable there. A broker is certainly not a common 
porter, and I maintain that I am a very respectable man ; 
1 had on my coat with furs, and still she sat as much at 


1 ) 



50 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


her ease, and spoke as calmly with her children, as if she 
were alone. Moreover, she seemed to have been crying, 
and I cannot bear discontented persons : it was cold and 
unsociable there, because everything had been taken away, 
and I like sociability. While going '^home I resolved to 
give Bastianus another trial, not liking to give anybody 
his dismissal. 

Now it is Stern's first week. Of course much is in it 
which I do not like ; but I must obey stipulation No. 2, 
and the Eosemeyers are of that opinion ; but I think that 
they flatter Stern, because he has an uncle at Hamburg 
in the sugar trade. 

Shawlman had indeed been at my house ; ho had spoken 
to Stern, aiid given him some information about words 
and matters which Stern did not understand. I beg the 
readers to peruse the following chapters ; then I promise 
afterwards something more substantial, composed by my- 
self, Batavus Dry stubble, coffee-broker (firm of Last ami 
Co., No. 37 Laurier Canal). 



CHAPTER V. 

[composed by stern.] 

About ten o’clock in the morning there was an unusual 
hustle on the principal highway which leads from the dis- 
trict Pandaglang to Lehak. “ Principal highway is, per- 
haps, too good a name for a wide footpath, which people 
called out of politeness, and from want of a better term, 
“ the way ; ” but if you started with a carriage and four 
from Scrang, tlie capital of Bantam,^ with the intention 
of going to Rankas-Betong, the new capital of the Lebak 
district, you would be sure to reach your destination some 
time or other. So it was a road. It is true you often 
stuck in the mud, wdiich in the Bantam lowlands is so 
heavy, clayey, and sticky, that travellers are often obliged 
to ask the assistance of the inhabitants of the villages in 
the neighbourhood — even of those who are not in the 
neighbourhood, for villages are not numerous in these 
regions; — but if you did succeed at last in getting the 
assistance of a score of husbandmen, it did not take long 

^ A Kcsitleiicy (province). 



52 


MAX IIAVELAAU. 


to get horses and carriage again on linn ground. Tlie 
coachman smacked his whip, the running boys — in Euro])e 
you would call them, I think, palfrcnicrs,” — but no, you 
have nothing in Europe which can give you an idea of 
these running boys. — These incomparable ninning boys, 
with their short tliin switches, tearing alongside of tlie 
four horses, making indescribable noises, and beating the 
horses under the belly to encourage them, till — the vexa- 
tious moment arrived when the carriage once more sank 
in the mud. Then the cry for help was renewed ; you 
waited till assistance was proffered, and then slowly i‘e- 
surned the journey. Often when I passed that way, 1 
expected to meet a carriage with travellers of the last 
century, who had stuck in the niiid, and been forgotten. 
Eut this never happened to me. Therefore I suppose, 
that every one who went that way, arrived at last at his 
destination. You would be mistaken, if you thought that 
all the roads in Java were in the same bad state. The 
military road with many branches, whicli ^Marshal Daen- 
dels' constructed with great sacrifice of men, is indeed a 
masterpiece, and you are struck with wonder at the 
energy of the man, who, notwithstanding many obstacles, 

' Ilennan Willem Daendels was born at Hattcm (province of Gel- 
derland), October 21, 1702. His father w.as Ihirgomaster of Hattein. 
In 1787 he went to France, and in 179.‘1 he toj)k part in the expedi- 
tion into Flanders under General Duiiiouriez. Afterwards he entered 
the service of the Dutch llci)ublic, and in 1799 di-stinguished himself 
in the campaign against the Anglo-Kussian army in North Holland. Ho 
tendered his resignation in 1801. In 1808 he was appointed Ciovernor- 



MAX HAVKLAAH. 


53 


raised up by envious opponents at borne, dared the dis- 
l)leasure of the population, the discontent of the chiefs, 
and succeeded in performing a task, that even now excites 
and merits the admiration of every visitor. 

No post-horses in Europe, not even in England, Eussia, 
or Hungary can be compared with those of Java. Over 
high mountain ridges, along the brow of precipices that 
make you shudder, tlie heavy-laden .travelling carriage 
flies on at full speed. The coachman sits on the box as 
if nailed to it, hours, yes, whole days successively, and 
swings the lieavy lash witli an iron hand. He can cal- 
culate exactly where and how much he must restrain the 
galloping horses, in order that, after descending at full 
speed from a mountain declivity, he may on reaching that 
corner * * 

''0 God’' (cries the inexperienced traveller), ''we 

are going down a precipice, there ’s no road, there’s an 

abyss!” * ^ 

\es, so it seems. The road bends, and just at the time 
when one more bound of the galloping animals would 
throw the leaders off tlie path, the horses turn, and sling 
the carriage round the corner. At full gallop they run 

General of the Dutch possessions in the East Tiulies. He was ap- 
pointed MarCelial de I’Empire in 1807. From 1808-1811 he governed 
those colonies. In 1811 he was recalled by Napoleon t., who had in- 
corporated Holland. He took part in the campaign of 1812 in Russia. 
In 1815 he was appointed Governor of the Dutch possessions on the 
coast of New Guinea, where he abolishe<l the slave-trade, and died in 



54 


MAX IIAVELAAK. 


lip the inountain lieight, which a iiioiiieiit before was 

unseen and the precipice is behind you. Sometimes 

the carriage is only supported at the bend by the 
wheels on the inside of the curve: centrifugal force has 
raised the outside ones off the ground. It needs a great 
deal of coolness, not to shut one’s eyes, and whoever 
travels for the first time in Java, generally writes to his 
family in Europe, that he has been in danger of his life ; 
but he whose home is in Java laughs at that. 

Reader, it is not my intention, particularly at the com- 
mencement of this history, to waste time in describing 
places, scenery, or buildings. — I am too much afraid of 
disheartening you, by what would resemble prolixity; and 
therefore, until I feel that I have won your attention, till 
I observe in your glances and in your countenance tliat 
the destiny of the heroine, who jumps somewlierc from a 
fourth storey, interests you, I shall not make her hover in 
tlie air, with a bold contempt for all the laws of gravita- 
tion, so long as is necessary for the accurate description of 
the beauty of the landscape, or the building, that seems to 
be put in somewhere to give occasion for a voluminous 
essay on media3val architecture. All tlios(i castles resemble 
each otlier. Tliey are invariaUy of lieterogeneous archi- 
tecture ; tlic main building always dates from some earlier 
reign than tlie wings which are added to it afterwards 
under the reign of such and sucli a king. The towers 
are in a dilapidaUid state. * * ♦ Reader, there are no 



MAX llAVELAAU. 


55 


towers. A tower is an idea, a dream. There are “ half 
towers,” and turrets. The fanaticism which wanted to 
put towers to the edifices that were erected in honour of 
this or that saint, did not last long enough to finish them ; 
and the spire, designed to point out heaven to believers, 
is generally supported by two or three low battlements on 
the huge base, which makes you think of the man without 
thighs at the fair. The towers of village churches only, 
with their spires, are finished. 

It is not very flattering to Western civilisation, that the 
enthusiasm for an extensive work has very seldom pre- 
vailed long enough to see that work finished. I do not 
now speak of undertakings whose completion was neces- 
sary to defray the expenses: whoever wants to know 
exactly what I mean, must go and see the Cathedral at 
Cologne. Let him think of the grand conception of that 
building in the soul of the architect of the faith in the 
hearts of the people, which furnished him with the means 
to commence and continue that labour of the influence 
of the ideas, which re(][uired such a colossus to serve as a 
visible representation of unseen religious feeling — and let 
him compare that enthusiasm with the train of ideas, that 
some centuries afterwards stopped the labour. 

There is a profound chasm between Erwin von Stein- 
bach and our architects ! I know, that for many years 
they have been occupied in filling up that chasm; at 
Cologne too they are again working at the Cathedral. 



56 


MAX HAVKLAAK. 


But will they be able to join the broken wire ; will they 
be able to find again in our days, wliat constituted the 
power of prelate and builder ? — I do not think so. Money 
may be contributed, stone and lime may be bought, a 
draughtsman may be paid to draw a plan, and a mason to 

fix the stones but the lost and still venerable fiiith, 

that saw in an edifice a poem — a ])oem of gi'anite, that 
spoke very loudly to the i)eop]e--a poem in marble, that 
stood tliere as an immovable continual eternal prayer, 
cannot be purcliased witli money. * * * * 

Tliere was one morning an unusual bustle on the froii- 
tiers between Lebak and Pandaglang. 1 lundreds of saddled 
horses were on the way, and a thousand men at least, a 
large number tor that place*, ran to and fro in active ex 
pectancy. There were the cliiefs of the villag(‘S, and the 
district chiets ot Lebak, all with tludr followers ; and 
judging from the beautiful Arab steetl, that stood there* 
in his rich caparison, a chief of great importance? must lx? 
there also. Such was the case. Tlic Ih'gmit of Lebak, 
liADEKy Aohipatti, Karta Xatta Nkgaka,^ had left Ban- 
kas-Betong with a numerous retinue, and notwithstanding 
his great age had travelled the twelve or thirt(‘en miles 
that separated his residence from Pandaglang. A new 
Assistant Besidont was coming ; and custom, wliich has 

^ “RaiUirii Aflliipaiti” h his titlo, and » Kaita Natta Nryani” his 
naiiie. 



the force of law iu the Indies more than anywhere else, 
will have it that the officer who is intrusted with the rule 
of a district must he festively received on his arrival. The 
Controller, too, was present. He was a man of middle age, 
and after the death of the last Assistant liesident, being 
tlie next in rank, had carried on the government for some 
months. 

As soon as the arrival of the new Assistant liesident was 
known, a 2}C')ulop2)o was erected in great haste ; a table 
and some chairs brought there with some refreshments, 
and in that ‘ pendoppo ’ the liegent, with the Controller, 
awaited the arrival of the new chief. After a broad- 
brimmed hat, an umbrella, or a hollow tree, a ‘pendoppo’ is 
certainly the most simple representation of the idea “roof.” 

I’icturc to yourself four or six bamboo canes, driven 
into the giound, tied together at the lop with other bam- 
boos, on which is placed a cover of the large leaves of the 
^vater-palm, callecL'in tlu'se regions atap, and you Avill 
have an idea of such a ‘pendoppo.’ It is, as you see, as 
simple as possible, and here it had only to serve as a 
pkd-a-krn, for the Euroiiean and native officials who 
were there to welcome their new chief. 

It was not veiy correct of me to call the Assistant Resi- 
dent the “chief” of the Regent. I must explain the 
machinery of government iu these regions. The so called 
“Dutch India ”--[1 think the expression inaccurate, but it 
is the official term]-— as far as regards the ivlation of its 



58 


MAX HAVEL A AK. 


population to the mother country, must be divided into 
two very distinct great divisions. 

One of these consists of tribes whose kings and princes 
have been content to be tributary to Holland, but have 
nevertheless retained the direct government, in a greater 
or less degree, in their own hands. The other division, to 
wliich the whole of Java belongs, with a very trifling, per- 
haps only apparent exception, is totally and directly sub- 
ject to Holland. There is hero no question about tribute, 
tax, or alliance. The Javanese is a Dutch subject. Tlie 
King of Holland is his king. The descendants of his 
former princes and lords arc Dutch functionaries: they 
arc appointed, transferred, promoted, dismissed, by tlie 
Governor-General, who reigns in name of the King. 
Criminals an; condemned and punished by a law made 
at the Hague. The taxes paid by the Javajiese flow into 
the Exeliecpier of Holland. 

This book will treat chiefly of these Dutch possessions, 
which form an integral part of the kingdom of Holland. 
The Governor- General is assisted by a Senate, but this 
Senate has no power to modify his resolutions. At llala- 
via, the different branches of the Government are divided 
into departments, with Directors at their head, who form 
the link between the supreme direction of the Governor- 
General and the Residents in llui provinces. Yet in mat- 
ters of a political nature the.se Residents api)ly directly 1<» 
the Governor-General. 



MxVX HAVELAAK. 


no 

The title of “ Kesident ” dates its origin from the time 
when Holland acted the part of a protecting State rather 
than that of a feudal superior, and was represented at the 
Courts of the several reigning princes by resident func- 
tionaries. The Princes are gone ; the Eesidents have he- 
coiiio rulers of provinces ; they have acquired the power 
of prefects. Their position is changed, but the name 
remains. 

It is properly those Eesidents who represent the Dutch 
authority in the eyes of the Javanese population, who 
know neither the Governor-General, nor the Senators of 
the Indies, nor the Directors at Batavia ; they know only 
tlie Eesident and the functionaries who reign subordinate 
to him. 

A Eesidcncy, so called — some of them have a popula- 
tion of one million souls, — is divided into three, four, or 
live departments or regencies, at the head of each of which 
is an Assistant Eesident. Under these the government is 
carried on by controllers, overseem, and a number of other 
olficers, who are re([uired for the gathering of the taxes, 
tlie superintendence of agriculture, the erection of build- 
ings, for the waterworks, the police, and the admiiiistration 
of justice. 

In every department the Assistant Eesident is aided by 
a native chief of high rank, with the title of Eegent. Such 
a Eegent, thougli his relation to the Government and his 
department is quite that of a paid ollicial, always belongs 



«o 


MAX HAVKLAAR. 


to the high aristoomoy of his country, and often to the 
family of the princes, who have governed in that part or 
neighbourhood as independent sovereigns. It is very 
politic in Holland to make use of the ancient feudal influ- 
ence of the princes, which in Asia is generally very great, 
and is looked upon by most of the tribes as a part of their 
religion, because, by making those chiefs paid officers of 
the Crown, a sort of hierarchy is created, at the head of 
which is the Dutch Covernment, in the person of the 
C}o\'ernor-Goneral. 

There is nothing new under tin' sun. AVere not the 
.Margraves, the I’.urgraves, of the (lerman Empire, ap- 
])ointe(l in the saniemanm'r bvthe Emptwor, ami gt'iierally 
elected from among the Earons ? Without ex])atiating on 
the origin of the nobility, wbieh is sulficiently (wideiit, 1 
wish here to insert the observation, that throughout tie' 
Indies the .same caus(;s have had the same efieets as in 
Europe. If a country must be ruled at a great distance, 
you will need functionaries to rc'jiresent the central jHjwer. 
Thus the Itomans under their .system of military desjHit 
ism cliose ]»ref(;cts from among the g(*neral.s cjf the h'gions 
who had .subjugated ii country. Such districts thenceforth 
remained “ jirovinces,” and weni ruled as compiests ! l>ul 
when afterwards the central jiower of the (Jerman Empire, 
endeavoured to hold the peoph^ in subj(“ction by other 
im ans than by material force, as .st)on a.s a distant region 
was considered to belong to the Empire from .similarity oi 



MAX HAVKLAAR. 


fil 


origin, language, and customs, it became necessary to 
charge with the management of affairs a person who not 
only was at home in that country, hut was elevated hy his 
rank above his fellow-citizens, in order that obedience to 
the commands of the Emperor might be rendered more 
easy by the military submission of the people to him who 
was intrusted with the execution of those commands ; and 
in this manner the cost of a standing army was altogether 
or in part avoided at the expense of the p\iblic treasury, 
or, as it generally happened, of the provinces themselves, 
who had to bo watched by an army. So the first Counts 
were chosen out of the Barons of the country, and if you 
take the word literally, then “ Count” is no noble title, 
but only the denomination of a peraon invested witli a 
certain ofliee. I, therefoio, also think, that in the middle 
age.s the opinion prevailed, that the German Emperor had 
the right to appoint “ Counts ” (governors of districts), and 
“ Dukes ” (commanders of armies), but that the Barons 
asserted that they were, as n^ganls their birth, equal to the 
Emperor, and were only dependent upon Clod, except as 
regarded their obligation to serve the Emperor, provided 
ho was elected with their approbation and from among 
their number. A Coiuit was invested with an olUce to 
which the Emperor had called him ; a Baron considered 
himself a Baron “ by the gmee of God.” The Counts re- 
presented the Emperor', arrd as such carried his bairners ; 
a Baron raised inert under his colours as a knight. The 



02 


MAX JIAVELAAR. 


circumstance that Counts and Dukes wore generally elected 
from among the Barons, caused them to add the import- 
ance of their employment to the infliience which they 
derived from their birth; and it seems that afterwards, 
especially when people got accustomed to the hereditary 
nature of those employments, the precedence arose which 
these titles had over that of Baron. Even now-a-days, 
many a noble family, without imperial or royal patent, 
that is to say, such a family as derives its nobility from 
the origin of the country itself, a family which always 
was noble, because it was noble — autochthonous — would 
refuse an elevation to the title of Count. There are in- 
stances of this. 

The peisons intrusted with the government of such a 
co\mty naturally tried to obtain from the Emperor, that 
their sons, or, in default of sons, other relations, should 
succeed them in their employment. This also happened 
very often, though I do not believe that the right to that 
succession was ever proved, at least in the case of those 
functionaries in the Netherlands, the Counts of Holland, 
Zealand, Flanders, llainault, — the Dukes of Brabant, Gel- 
derland, etc. At first it was a favour, soon it became a 
custom, at last a necessity ; but never did that succession 
become a law. 

Almost in the same way, as to the choice of persons,- - 
because there can be no question of similarity of position, 
- a native functionary is placed at the head of a district 



MAX HAVELAAK, 


f)3 

of Java, who adds to the rank given him by the Govern- 
ment his antochthonous influence, to facilitate the rule of the 
European functionary representing the Dutch Government, 
Here, too, hereditary succession, without being established 
by law, has become a custom. During the life of the 
llegent this is often arranged ; and it is regarded as a re- 
ward for zeal and trust, if they give him the promise that 
he shall be sixcceeded by his son. There must be very 
important reasons to cause a departure from that rule, and 
where tliis is necessary, a successor is generally elected out 
of the members of the same family. The relation between 
European officials and such high-placed Javanese nobles 
is veiy delicate. The Assistant Eesident of a district is 
the responsible person ; he has his instructious, and is 
considered to be the chief of the district. Still the Kegent 
is much his superior — through local knowledge, birth, in- 
fluence on the population, peciiniary revenues, and man- 
ner of living. Moreover, a Kegent, as representing the 
Javanese clement, and being considered the mouthpiece of 
the hundred thousand or more inhabitants of his regency, 
is also in the eyes of the Government a much more import- 
ant personage than the simple European officer, whose 
discontent need not be feared, because they can get many 
others in his place, whilst the displeasure of a Kegent 
would become perhaps the germ of disturbance or revolt. 

From all this arises the strange reality that the inferior 
.actually commands the superior. The Assistant Resident 



04 


MAX IIAVELAAK. 


orders the Regent to make statements to him ; he orders 
liiin to send labourers to work at the bridges and roads ; 
he orders him to gather the taxes ; he summons him to 
the Council, of which he, the Assistant Resident, is Presi- 
dent ; he blames him where he is guilty of neglect of duty. 
This peciiliar relation is made possible only by very polite 
forms, which need not exclude either cordiality, or where 
it is necessary, severity ; and 1 beli(;ve that the (hnneanour 
to be maintained in this relation is very well described in 
the official instructions on the subject, as follows, “The 
Ruropean functionaiy has to treat the native functionary, 
who aids him, as his youngei brother.” P>ut he must not 
forget that this younger brother is very ninch loved, or 
feared, by his pai'ents, and in the event of any dispute, his 
own seniority would immediately be accounted as a motivi' 
f(jr taking it amiss that he did not treat his younger 
brother with more indulgence. 

The innat(! courtoousness of the Javanese grandee, — even 
the common Javaiu.-se are much politer than Europeans in 
the same condition, — makes this a])])arently dillicult rela- 
tion more tolerabh? than it otherwise would be. 

Let the Piuidj»(!an have a good e<lucatiun, with some 
refinement, let him behave him.self with a friendly dignity, 
and he may be Jis.sured that the Regent on his pin t will do 
all in his power to facilitate his rule. The distasteful c<mi- 
rnand yjut in an inviting forjn is ]ninclually p(!rf(jrmed. 
The difference in position, liirth, wealth, is (iffinaal by tlui 



MAX HAVKLAAU. 


r,r> 


Jiegent liimself, who raises the European, as Representa- 
tive of the King of the Netherlands, to his own position ; 
and the result of a relation which, viewed superciliously, 
would have brought about collision, is very often the source 
of an agreeable intercourse. 

I said that such Regents had i)rccedence over the Euro- 
[)ean functionaries on account of tluiir wealth ; and this is 
a matter of course. Tlie European, when he is summoned 
to govern a province*, wliich in vsurface is equal to many 
fJ(*rnian duchii's, is generally a i)erson of middle or more 
advanced age, married and a father: he fills an office to 
gain his livelihood, llis pay is only sufficient, and often 
insufficient, to procure what is necessary for his family. 
The Regent is Tominongoag,’' Adhipatti,” ^ yes, even 
“ Rangerang,’' that is, a “Javanese ])riiice.’' The question 
for liiiu is not that of getting his living; he must live 
according to his rank. 

While tlie European live.s in a house, his residimce is 
often a KrutooHy^ witli many houses and villages therein. 
Where the Ihiropean lias a wife with three or four chil- 
dren, lu* supports a gnnil number of women with their 
attinidants. While the European rides out, followed by a 
few officers — as many as an? necessary to draw up reports 
on his journey of inspection,- the Regent is followed by 
hundreds of retaint*rs that belong to his suite, and in the 
eyi*s of the people tlu*se are insi*parable from his high rank. 

^ Titles of uobility. “ C^istle, palaco, eto. 


K 



MAX IIAVKLAAI}. 


fio 

The European lives citizen-like; the Ih'sent lives --or is 
supposed to live — as a Prince. 

But all this must be paid for. The Butch Government 
which has founded itself on the inttueneii of these Begents, 
knoAvs this ; and therefore nothing is more natural than 
that it has raised their incomes to a standard that must 
appear exaggerated to one unaocjuaintod with Indian 
affairs, but which is in truth very seldom suflicicnt to 
meet the expenses that are necessarily incuired by the 
mode of life of such a native cliief 

It is no uncommon thing to find I’egents in pecuniary 
difficulties avIio liave an income of two or tlirtic liundred 
thousand guilders.^ This is brought about by the jmntady 
indifference witli whicli they lavish their money, and 
neglect to watch their inrerions, by tlieir fondness for buy 
ing, and, above all tldngs, the abuse often made of tli(*sc 
qualities by Emnpeans. 'I'be ri'vimue of the .Javanese 
grandees may be divided into four parts. In the. first 
place, their fixed monthly pay ; secanully, a fixc'd sum as 
indemnification for their bought-u]) rights, which have 
passed to the But(;h fJovernment; thirdly, a pnunium on 
the productions of their regency, — as cofl'ei;, sugar, indigo, 
cinnamon, etc. ; and lastly, the arbitrary dis]>osal of tlie 
labour and property of tlu.dr subjects. 'J'lu* two last-men- 
tiont;d s(jurces of nni'niu; need .some exjdanation. The 
Javano.se is by nature a hmsbamlman ; the ground wluireon 

' Fr.im .f III, (»(>(» to 



MAX irAVKLAAK. 


07 


ha is born, which gives much for little labour, nllures him 
to it, aiul, above all things, he devotes his whole heart and 
soul to tlie cultivating of his rice-fields, in wliich he is 
very clever. He grows u]) in the midst of his scavahs, and 
f/ar/ahs, and tipars;^ when still very young, he accom- 
])anies his fatlier to the field, where he helps him in liis 
labour with plough and spade, in constructing dams and 
drains to irrigate his fields ; he counts his years by har- 
vests ; he (\stinuites time by the colour of the blades in his 
field ; he is at home amongst the companions who (*ut 
paddy with him ; he chooses his wife amongst the girls of 
tlu* who every evening tread the rice with joyous 

songs. The possession of a few buflalot^s for ploughing is 
the ideal of his dri^ams. The cultivation of rice is in Java 
what the vintagv is in tlu.^ Khine provinces and in the 
south of Franc(‘. Hut th(M*(‘ canu^ foreigners from the 
W(\st, wlio madi^ th(‘ms(‘lvcs masters of the country. They 
wished to ])rolit by the fi*rtility of lln‘ soil, and ordered 
tlu‘ nativi* to d(‘vot(‘ a ])art of liis time and labour to the 
cultivation of otlier things which shoidd produce higher 
profits in tlu* markets of Kurojn*. To pi*rsuade the lowor 
ord(‘rs to do so, they only hail to follow a very simple 
}»olicy. 'I'lu* Javaiicsi* obeys his chiefs; to win the chiefs, 
it was only ii(‘ccssary to give them a part of the gain, 
and su(*('ess was coiu[)let(*. 

^ "Flu* jlilloivnco bctwooii .'uttrnhs^ an<l a ml 

fi/ftirft is ill tlu‘ nimlr nt' riiltivation. 

' Javaiicst* villai^r. 



MAX IIAVKI.AAII. 


()8 

To be convinced of the success of that policy wo ne(Ml 
only consider the iynnense quantity of Javanese products 
sold in Holland ; and w(‘ shall also be convinced ot its 
injustice, for, if anybody should ask if the husbandman 
himself gets a reward in ])roportion to that quantity, then 
I must give a negatm? answer. Th(‘ (lovc*rnment compels 
him to cultivate certain products on liis ground ; it 
punishes him if ho sells what he has produced to any 
purchaser hut itself; and it lixes the price actually paid. 
The expenses of transport to Kuro[)e through a ])rivil(‘ged 
trading company are high ; the money paid to the chiefs 
for encouragement iiKux'ases the prime cost; an<l Ix'cause 
tlie (‘iitire trade must jiroduce ])rofit, that profit cannot ho 
got ill any other way tlian by paying the Javan(*se just 
enough to keep him from starving, wliich would lessen tlu^ 
producing power of the nation. 

To tlie European officials, also, a premium is paid in 
proportion to the produce. It is a fact that tli(‘ poor 
Javanese is thus driven by a doul)le force; that he is 
driven away from his rice-fields; it is a fact that lamine is 
often the consequ(*nco of these mt^asures; l)ut tlu' flags of 
the ships, laden witli the harvest that makes Holland rich, 
are flapping gaily at liatavia, at Samaraiig, at Soorabaya, 
at Passarooan, at ]}(3Zookie, at Ihobolingo, at Patjitan, at 
Tjilatjap. 

Famine ? In Java, the rich and fertile, famine?'' 

— Yes, reader, a few years ago whohj districts weredepojui 



MAX IIAVKLAAU. 


CD 

lated by famine ; mothers offered to sell their children for 

food, mothei's ate their own childrcB. But tlien the 

mother-country interfered. In the halls of the Dutch 
Parliament complaints were made, and the then reigning- 
(lovernor had to give orders that the extension of the 
SO-CALLED EuUOPEAN MAUKET SHOULD NO LONGER BE 
PUSHED TO THE EXTREMITY OF FAMINE. 

“ Oh ! this angelic Parliament ! ” 

This I write with bitterness — what would you think 
of a person tliat could describe such things lyithout 
bittt'i'uess ? 

I have yet to .speak of the last and principal source of 
the revenues of the native cliiefs, viz., their arbitrary dis- 
posal of the itt-r.sous ami property of their subjects. Ac- 
cording to the general idea in nearly the whole of Asia, 
tlie subject, rvith all that he po.ssesses, belongs to the 
prince. Tlie descendants or relatives of the former princes 
like to ])rofit by the ignorance of tire people, who do not 
yet (piite understand that their “ Tommongong,” “ Adhi- 
liatti,” or “ Pangeruug” is now a paid ofheial, who has sold 
his own rights and theirs for a fixed income, and that thus 
the ill-re(|uitod labour of tire coffee plantation or sugar 
field has taken tlie place of the taxes wliich they formerly 
paid their lords. Hence nothing is more common than 
that hundreds of families are summoned from far remote 
})laces to work, without payment, on fiehls that belong to 
ibc! liciienl. Notliintr is more c(*mmon than tlie furnishing 



70 


MAX lIAVKIAAIt. 


of unpaid-for provisions for tlic use of tho Court of tlie 
Ivegent; and if the Regent happens to cast a longing eye 
on tlie horse, the buffalo, the daughter, tho wife of the poor 
man, it would be thoiight unheard-of if he refused the 
unconditional surrender of the desired object. There are 
Regents who make a reasonable use of such arbitrary 
powers, and who do not exact more of the jjoor man than 
is strictly uecess.'uy to uphold their rank. Some go a little 
further, and this injustice is nowhere entirely wanting. 
And it is very difficult, nay even impossible, entirely to 
destroy such an abuse, because it is in the nature of tlu^ 
population itself to induce or create it. The Java- 
nese is cordial, above all things where he has to give a 
proof of attachment to his chief, to the descendant of 
those whom his forefathers obeyed. He woidd even think 
himself wanting in tlu' re.spect due to his hereditary lord, 
if he entered his Kruloon without presents. Tlu'se gifts 
are often of .such small value, that to refuse them would 
be a humiliation, and tlic usage is rather more like the 
homage of a child who tries to give utterance to filial 
love by offering his father a little present, than a tribute 
to tyrannical d(!s])otism. 

Rut the e.xistence of such a good custom makes the 
abolition of a liad one very difliculf. 

If the oloon iiloon^ in front of the re.sidence of the 

' .i'l - .1 square ill fnuit »>f a eliiel’s resiileiiee, (iriiaiiiuuted 
with lic.'Uitiful tite.s, - called iiv/i i/ii/;. 



MAX H.VVULAAU. 


71 


Kegeut were in an uncultivated condition, the neighbour- 
ing popidation would he ashamed of it, and much force 
woiild be reqiiired to prevent them from clearing that 
s(piare of weeds, and putting it in a condition suitable to 
the rank of the Itegent. To give any payment for this 
would be considered as an insult to all. But near this 
‘ aloon-aloon,’ or elsewhere, there ai’c ‘ sawahs ’ that wait 
for the jdougb, or a channel to bring water, (jften from a 
distance of many mile.s. Those ‘sawahs’ belong to the 
Kegeut. lie summons the population of whole villages, 

whose ‘sawahs’ need labour as well as his. There you 

have the abuse. 

I'his is known to the Government ; and whosoever reads 
the ollicial papers, containing the laws, instructions, regula- 
tions, etc., for the functionarii^s, applauds the humanity 
and justice which seem to have iufluenc('d those who 
nuule them. Wherever the European is intrusted with 
Itower ill the interior of Java, he is clearly told that one 
of liis first obligations is to prevent the self-abasement of 
the peo]»h', and to protect them from the covetousness of 
the chiefs ; and,, as if it were not enough to make this 
obligation generally known, a special oath is exacted from 
the Assistant Kesidents that when they enter upon the 
government of a province, they will regard this fatherly 
care for the population as their first duty. 

’I’liat is a noble vocation. To maintain justice, to pro 
feet th(! ])oor against the ])owerful, to defend the weak 



72 


MAX HAVKLAAI!, 


against the superior power of tlie strong, to recover the 
ewe-lamb from the fohls of the kingly robber : — well, all 
this makes your heart glow with pleasure at the idea that 
it is your lot to have so noble a vocation ; — and let any 
one in the intei ior of Java, who may be sometimes discon- 
tented with his situation or pay, consider the sublime 
duty which devolves upon him, and the glorious delight 
which the fulfilment of such a duty gives, and he will not 
be desirous of any other rew.ard. But that duty is by no 
means easy. In the first place, one has exactly to con- 
sider where tli(! v.se ends, to make room for nhvse ; — and 
where the al)use exists, v'here robbery has indeed been 
committed by the exercise of arbitrary power, the victims 
themselves are, for the most part, accomplices, either from 
extreme submission, or from fear, or from distnist of the will 
or the power of the man Avhose duty it is to ])rolect them. 
Every one knows, that the European officer can be siim- 
moned every moment to nnotlu>r employment, and that 
the Eegeut, the powerful Eegent, remains there. iMon;- 
ovcr, there are so many ways of appro])riating the property 
of a poor ignorant man. If a vmnlrif} says to liiin that 
the Begcnt wants las hor.se, the consequence is, that the 
wi.slied-for animal is .soon found in the I’egcnt’s stables ; 
Imt tliis does not mean that the Ecgmit does not iiiteml to 
pay handsomely for it some time or other. If hundreds 

^ Mtintrk = upper servant — propi-rly an iivcrsM-r nf tlic building 
dcpartmi-nt, and <if a'.;ricultiii.-. 



MAX IIAVELAAH. 


73 


of people labour on the fields of a chief, without getting 
iiioney for it, this is no proof that he makes them do so 
for his benefit. Might it not have been his intention to 
give them the harvest, having made the philanthropic 
calculation that his fields were more fertile than theirs, 
and would much better reward their labour ? 

Besides, where could the European officer get witnesses 
having the courage to give evidence against their lord the 
Begent ? And, if he ventured to make an accusation with- 
out b(nng able to prove it, where would be the relation of 
elder brother, who, in such a case, would liave impeached 
liis young('r brotluVs lionour ? AVhere would he then find 
the favour of the Government, which gives him bread for 
service, l)ut which would take that bread from him, which 
would discharge him as incapable, if he rashly accused so 
high a i)ersonage as an “ Adhipatti ” or “ Pangeraiig?” 

No, no, that duty is by no means easy 1 This can be 
jiroved by the fact — apparent to every one — that each 
native chief pushes too far the limit of the lawful dis- 
})osal of labour and }>roper(y ; that all Assistant Ifi'sideiits 
take an oath to resist this, ainl yet that very seldom a 
Begeiit is accused for abus(^ of powei’ or arbitrary conduct. 

It seems also that there must be an insurmountable 
ililliculty in kt'epinfj the until : “ TO PKOTECT THE NATIVE 
roPlJLATlON AOAINST EXTOUTION AND TYKANNV.'’ 



OHArTEK VI. 

[continuation of stkkn’s composition.] 

The Controller Verbriiggo was a good man. Wliun you 
SUAV liini sitting there in his blue cloth dress-coat, em- 
broidered with oak and orange brandies on collar and 
cuffs, you could not have found a better tyj)e of the 
Dutchiuan in India, who, by the way, is ([uite different 
from the Dutchnian in Holland. Slow as long as tlun-e 
was nothing to be done ; far from that fussiness, which in 
Europe is mistaken for zeal, but zealous wlan’e business 
requiiud attention ; plain, but cordial to those around 
him; communicative, willing to lu'lp, and hospitabh; ; 
very polite witliout stiffness ; susceptible of good impres- 
sions; honest and sincere, without wishing to b(‘ a martyr 
to these qualities ;~ in short, he was a man, who, as 
they say, could make himself at home anywhere, yet 
without making any one think of calling the century 
by his name- an honour wdiich, in truth, he did not 
desire. 

He was sitting in tla^ middle of the ‘ pendoppo,’ near 



MAX IIAVEr.AAU. 


tlic table, wliicli was covered with a white cloth, and well 
furnislied witli viands. Eather impatiently from time to 
time, in the words of Mrs. Bluebeard’s sister, he asked 
the mandoor — [that is, the chief of police, and officials 
under the Assistant Eesident] — if there was nothing to be 
seen. Then he got up, tried in vain to make his spurs 
ehitter on the hard clay floor of the "peiuloppo,’ lighted 
his cigar, and sat down again. He spoke little; but could 

have spoken more, for he was not alone. 1 do not ref(‘r 

to the twenty or thirty Javanese servants, ‘mantries,’ njid 
overseers, who sat S(piatting on the ground in the 'pen 
doi)po,’ nor to the nund)evs who incessantly laii in and out, 
nor to those of diflerent rank, that held the horses out- 
side, (»r rode on horseba(*k ; — the E(‘gent of Lebak himself, 
Eadeen Adhipatti Karta Xatla Xegara, sat iacang him. 
To wait is always tiresonai: a (piarter of an hour seems 
an hour; an hour half a day, and so on. Verbrugge might 
liave l)een nane talkative. The l!c‘gent of J.ebak was an 
intelligiuit old man, who could speak on many subjects 
with stmse and judgment : one had only to look at him to 
l)e convinced that most of the Europeans who came in 
conta(d with him had more to learn from him than la* 
from them. His cl(‘ar dark eyes contradicted by their fire 
the weariness of his features and his grey hairs. What 
h(i said was generally well considered, which is indeed 
generally tlui case with cultivated Orientals; and you 
)K*rc(hved, if you wmv in a (‘onversation with him, that 



•76 


MAX HAVKLAAR. 


you liad to consider his words as letters, of which he had 
the copy in his archives, in order to recall them if 
necessary. This may appear disagreeable to tliosc who 
are not accustomed to converse with Javanese grandees, 
yet it is very easy to avoid in convei'sation all topics 
that might become a stumbling-block, for they will never 
abruptly give another direction to the course of the con- 
versation ; because, according to Eastern ideas, this would 
b(i contrary to politeness. Tims every o)io who has reason 
to avoid speaking on a certain subject has only to speak 
about insignificant matters, and he may rest assiired that 
a Javanese chief will not, by giving the conversation an 
unwished-for turn, bring him upon ground which he does 
not like to tread upon. 

On the mode of dealing with these chiefs there are also 
different opinions. 1 think that sincerity alone, without 
any attempt at diplomatic i)rudence, deserviis preference. 
Be that as it may, Verbrugge bi-gan with an observation 
on the weather and the rain. 

“ Yes, IVIr. Controller, it is the rainy season.” 

Xow Y^erbrugge knew this very well: it was January; 
but the Eegent knew, too, what he had said about the 
rain. Tlien again there Avas silence. The Begent beckoned 
with a scarcely \'isible motion of the head to one of the 
.servants that sat squatting at the entrance of the ‘pen 
doppo.’ A little boy, splendidly dressed in a blue velvet 
jacket and white trousers, with a golden girdle confining 



MAX IIAVKI.AAI!. 


77 

Ills niagiiificeiit Sarong^ round Ins waist, and on his 
head the pretty Kain Kafola} \inder which his black 
eyes pec^ped forth so roguishly, crei)t squatting to the feet 
of the Il(!gent, put down tlie gold box which contained the 
Siric,^ the lime, the 2nnung, the gahibier,* and the tobacco, 
made his ^hmat by raising both his hands put together 
1.0 Ids forehead, as he bowed low, and then otfered the pre- 
cious hox to his inast(!r. 

“ The road will be very diflicult, after so much rain,” 
said (he Regent, as if to explain the long ])ause, whilst he 
covered the betel-leaf with lime. 

“Tu the I’andaglaug (In^ road is not so bad,” Verbnigge 
replied ; who, unless ho wanted to hint at something dis- 
agreeahle, gave that answ(‘r certainly a little inconsider- 
ately; for he ought t(.) have taken into consideration that 
a Regent of Lebak does not lik(‘, to hear the randaglang 
roads praised, even if they are much belter than those of 
licbak. 

'fhe Adhipatti did not make the ndstake of replying too 
([uickly. The little muo.s had already crept squatting 
backwards to the entrance of the ‘ })endoppo,’ when! he re- 
mained with his companions; the Itegent luul made his 

' A i)iocL* of liiuMi. ''riie Javanese women draw fiiriires on such 
Saruuiia wherewith they express some tlurnghts or emotion.— AS'aro/n/, 
a Hart of i>cttici>at. 

A hamlkerchief tied round the heatl ; a sort of tnrhau. The 
Javanese never appears witli uncovered head. 

^ Hetel. ^ Piiniinj, tjamhirr , — dilTereut spices. 



78 


MAX HAVELAAH. 


lips and few remaining teeth red with the juice of liis 
betel, before he said — 

“ Yes ; Pandagiang is more popidtnis.” 

To one accpiainted with the Regent and the Control ler, 
to whom the state of Lebak was no secret, it M’oidd havii 
been quite clear that the cou\'ersation had already become 
a (piaiTol, An allusion to the better state of the roads in 
a neighbouring province appeared to be the conseciuence 
of the fruitless endeavours to im])rove the roails in Lebak. 
But the Regent u'as right in saying that Pandagiang Avas 
more populous, above all things, in ja-oportion to the much 
smaller surface, and that, of course, united pou'cr reiuhired 
labour on the great roads there much easier than in Lebak, 
a province which counted but seventy thousand inhahit- 
ants on a surface of some hundred mih's. 

“ That is true,” said Verbrugge, “ our ])0])ulation is not 
large, but ” 

The A<lhipatti looked at him, as if he e.xjx-cted an attack, 
lie knew that “but” might he followed by sonaghing 
disagreeable for him to hear, who had been for thirty 
years Regent of Lebak. Verbrugge wi.shed to end tlu' 
conversation, and asked tin* ‘mandom-’ again if he saw 
nothing coming. 

r> o 

“ 1 do not yet see anything from the Pandagiang side, 
iMr. Controller; but yonder on the other side there is 
somebody on liors<;back it is the Commandant.” 

“ To be sure, Dong, so ! ” .said Vcubrugge, looking otitside ; 



MAX IIAVELAAli. 


79 


“ lie hunts in this neighbourhood ; he went away this 
morning very early lio! Duclari- Duclari ” 

“ Jle hears you, sir; he is coming this %vay. His hoy 
rides after him.” 

“ Hold the Commandant’s horse,” said Verhrugge 
to one of the servants. “ riood-niorning, Duclari, are you 
wet ? what have you killed ? Come in.” 

A strong man about thirty yc'ars of age and of military 
ajipearance, though there was no trace of a uniform to he 
si.'en, entered the ‘ pendoppo.’ It was Lieutenant Duclari, 
commandant of the small garrison of liaukas-Betong. 
Verhrugge and he were I'amiliar friends, as Duclari hatl 
lived for some time in Verhrugge’s house, pending tlu* 
completion of a new fort. He shook hands with him, 
politely .saluted the Itegent, and ,sat down asking: “ What 
have you here ?” 

“ Will you have some tea, Duclari ?” 

“ Certainly not ; 1 am hot enough. Have you no cocoa 
nut milk ? — that is refre.shing.” 

“ I won’t let you have it. If one is hot, cocoa-milk is, 
in my opinion, very unwholesome; it makes you stiff and 
gouty. Look at the ctw/irs who carry heavy Imnlens over 
the mountains — tlii'j' keep themselves active and supple 
hy drinking hot watm- or Koppi dahocn — hut ginger-tea 
is still better ” 

“What?- A'epp/ t/a/iorii, tea of colfei'-leaves ? That I 
have never seen.” 



80 


M,VX HAVKI.AAI!. 


“ Because you have not served in Sumatra : there it is 
common.” 

“Let me haA^e tea then — but not of coffee-leaves, or 

ginger. So, you have been at Sumatra ^and the new 

Assistant Resident, too, has he not ? ’ 

All this was spoken in Dutch, which the Itegcnt did 
not understand. Either Duclari felt that it was not very 
polite to exclude him in this Avay from the convereation, 
or lie had anotlier object in vieiv, because all at once he 
commenced speaking iMalay, addressing the Regent 

“ Does the Adhipatti know that the Controller is ac- 
quainted with the new Assistant Resident?” 

“ Xo, I did not say .so ; — I don’t know him,” said Ver 
brugge, in Malay. “ 1 have never seen him ; ho served in 
Sumatra some years before me. I only told you that 1 
had there heard a good deal about him.” 

“ Xow, that is the same thing; it is not necessary to 

sec a person in oi'der to know him Avhat dixjs the 

Adhipatti think about it ? ” 

The Adhipatti at that moment wanted to call a servant. 
Some time elapsed before he could say, “ that he agreed 
Avith the Commandant, but that still it was often necessary 
to see a person before you could judge of him.” 

“ Generally .speaking, that is perhaps ti ue,” Duclari con- 
tinued in Dutch, either because Ik; knew that language 
better, and thought he had done enough for politeness’ sake;, 
or because he wished to be understood by Verbrugge alone. 



MAX HAVELAAU. 


81 


- that may be true, generally speaking ; but with regard 

to Havelaar you need no personal acquaintance ^he is 

a fool.” 

“ I did not say so, Duclari.” 

“ No, you did not say so, but I say it, after all you have 
told me of him. I call any one who jumps into the water 
to save a dog from the sharks a fool.” 

“ Yes, it was foolish, but ” 

“ And recollect that epigram on General Van Damme 

^that was not proper.” 

“ It was witty ” 

“ Yes, but a young man may not be witty at the ex - 
pense of a General." 

“ You must bear in mind that he was then very young 
— it was fourteen years ago — he was only twenty years 
old.” 

“ And then the turkey which he stole ? ” 

“ That he did to annoy the General.” 

“ Exactly so. A young man may not annoy a General, 

especially one who is, as civil governor, his superior 

the epigram I think very funny but then again that 

duelling -” 

“ He did it generally on behalf of another ; he always 
was the champion of the weak.” 

“ Well, lot every one fujht for himself, if fighting there 
must be. As for me, 1 think that a duel is seldom neces- 
sary ; if necessary, I should accept it, but to make a 


K 



82 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


custom of it I’d rather not. I hope that he is changed 

in this respect ” 

“ To be sure, there is no doubt about that. He is now 
so much older, has long been a married man, and Assistant 
Eesident. Moreover, I have always heard that his heart 
is good, and that he has a strong sense of justice.” 

" Then he is just fit for Lebak something happened 

this morning that Do you think that the Regent 

understands us ? ” 

“ I do not think so ; but show me something out of your 
game-bag ; then he will think that we are speaking of that.” 

Duclari took liis bag, pulled out two Avood-cocks, and, 
handling them, as if speaking .about his sport, he commu- 
nicated to Verbrugge that he had been followed by a 
Javanese, who had asked him if he could do nothing to 
lighten the pressure under which the population groaned ? 
" And,” he went on, “ that means much, Verbrugge ! Not 
that I wonder at the fact itself ; 1 have been long enough 
in the Residency of Bantam to know what is going on 
here ; but that a common Javanese, generally so circum- 
spect and reserved in what concerns the chiefs, should 
make such a request to one who has nothing to do Avith 
it, surprises me.” 

“ And Avhat did you answ(a-, Duclari ?” 

“ Well, that it Avas not my business ; that he nuxst go to 
you,, or to the neAv Assistant Resident, when he arrives 
at Rankas-Betong, and there make his complaint.” 



>[AX HAVELAAR. 


83 


“There they come,” said the sei-vant Dougso, all at 
once. “ I see a ‘ mantrie ’ waving his toodoong.” ^ 

All stood up. ])uclai-i not wishing it to appear that he 
liad come to the frontiers to welcome the Assistant Resi- 
dent, his superior in lauk hut not in command, and who 
was moreover a fool, mounted his horse, and rode off, 
followed by his servant. 

The Adhipatti and Verbnigge, standing at the entrance 
of the ‘pendoppo,’ saw a travelling carriage approaching, 
dragged by four horses, which soon stopped, covered with 
mud, near the little bamboo building. 

It would have been very difticult to guess what there 
could be in that coach, before JJongso, helped by the run- 
ners and a legion of servants belonging to the Regent’s 
suite, had undone all the straps and buttons, that enclosed 
the vehicle in a black leathern cover, an operation which 
put you in mind of the precautions with which lions and 
tigers were formerly brought into cities when the Zoolo- 
gical Gardens W'ere as yet only travelling menageries. 
Now there were no lions or tigers in the van ; they 
had only shut it up in this way because it was the 
west monsoon,''^ and it was necessary to be prejaired for 
rain. 

Now the alighting out of a van, in which one has jolted 
tor a long time along the road, is not so easy, as he would 

' A broad-brimmed straw liat, affording pi'otcction from rain and sun. 

* The rainy season. 



84 


MAX HAVELAAE. 


think who has never, or but seldom travelled. Almost as 
in the case of tlie poor Saurians of the Antediluvian 
period, wliich, by staying too long,* at last became an in- 
tegral part of tlie clay, which they had not originally 
entered with the intention of remaining there, so with 
travellers who have been sitting too long cooped up in a 
travelling carriage, there l)a2^i>ens sometliing tliat I projxjse 

to caU assimilation. At last one hardly knows where 

the leathern cushion ends, and his individuality begins. 
Yes, I even think that one might have toothache or 
cramp in such a ijosition, and mistake it for moth in 
the cloth, or mistake moth in the clotli for toothache or 
cramp. • • • 

There arc but few circumstances in the material world 
that do not afford to the thinking man the oi)portunity 
of making intellectual observations, and so I have often 
asked myself whether many errora, that have become com- 
mon with us, many “ Wrongs” that we think to be right, 
owe their origin to the fact, of having beim sitting too long 
with the same company in the same travelling carriage t 
The leg, that you had to i)ut there on the left, between the 
hfit-box, and the little basket of cheiTies ; — the knee, whicli 
you held 2)resscd against the coach-door, not to make the 
lady o 2 )j)osite you think that you intended an attack on 
her crinoline or virtue ; — the foot, covered with corns, that 
was so much afraid of the heels of the “ commercial travel 
ler near you ; - the neck, which you had to bend so long 



MAX HAVEL AAR. 


85 


a time to the left because rain came in on the right side, 
all these arc at last somewhat distorted, I think it well 
to change from time to time coaches, seats, and fellow- 
travellers. Then you can give your neck another direc- 
tion, you can sometimes move your knee, and perhaps you 
may have a young lady near you with dancing- shoes, or a 
little boy whose feet do not touch the ground. Then you 
have a better chance of looking and walking straight, as 
soon as you get solid earth under your feet. 

If anything in the coach that stopped before the ' pen- 
doppo ’ was opposed to the solution of continuity I don’t 
know ; but it is certain that it was some time before any- 
thing appeared. 

There seemed to be a difficulty of etiquette, judging from 
the words: “If you please. Madam!” and “Jlesident!” 
Be this as it may, a gentleman at length stepped out who 
had in his attitude and appearance something perhaps 
which made you think of the Saurians I have spoken of. 
As we shall meet him again afterwards, I will tell you at 
once that his immobility was not only due to assimilation 
with the travelling coach, since, even when there was no 
van in the neighbourhood, he exhibited a calmness, a slow- 
ness, and a prudence, that would make many a Saurian 
jealous, and that in the eyes of many would be considered 
as tokens of a sedate, calm, and wise man. He was, like 
most Europeans in India, very pale, which, however, is 
not in the least considered in these regions as a sign of 



86 


MAX lIAVELAAIf. 


delicate health. He had fine features, that certainly bore 
witness of intelleclual development. I’lit there was some- 
thing cold in his glaiuic, sonndhing that made you think of 
a table of logaritlims ; and though his asjicct on the whole 
was not unplcasing or n'jiulsivc, one could not help think- 
ing that the very large thin nose on that face was annoyed 
because there was .so little stir. 

He politely offered his hand to a ladj^ to help her in 
getting out, and after he had taken from a gentleman who 
was still in the coach, a child, a little fair boy of about 
three, years old, they ent(‘ved the ‘ pendoppo.’ Then that 
gentleman himself alighted, and any one acquainted with 
Java would immediately observe that he waited at the 
caiTiage door to assist an old Javanese hahoe (nursf!- 
maid). Three servants had delivered themselves out of 
the little leather cupboard that was stuck to the back of 
the coach, after the manner of a young oyster on an old 
one. 

The gentleman who had first alighted had offered his 
hand to the llegent and the Controllei-Verbrugge, which 
they accepted with respect ; and by their attitude you 
could see that they wei-e aware of the presence of an 
important per.sonage. It was the Resident of Rantam, the 
great province of which Ixibak is a district, — a Regency, 
or, in official language, an Assistant Residency. I have 
often, when reading works of fiction, been offended at the 
little respect of the axithors for the taste of the public. 



MAX HAVELAAK. 


87 


and more than ever with anything comical or burlesque ; 
ii person is made to speak, who does not understand the 
language, or at least pronounces it badly ; a Frenchman is 
made to speak Dutch thus : “ Kaiirv na de Krote 
Krithl' or “ Krietje Komt Keen Kare Kroente Kraakivek.” * 
For want of a Frenchman, a stammerer is selected, or 
a person " created,” whose hobby consists of two words 
recurring every moment. I have witnessed the success of 
a foolish vaudeville, because there was somebody in it who 
was always saying : “ My name is Meyer.” 1 think this 
manner of being witty too cheap, and to tell you the 
truth, I am cross witli you, if you think tliis funny. But 
now, I liave to introduce to you something of that kind 
myself. 1 have to show you from time to time a person 
—I shall do it as seldom as possible- - who had, indeed, a 
manner of speaking whicli makes me fear to be suspected 
of an unsuccessful effort to make you laugh ; and, there- 
fore, I must assure yo\i that it is not my fault, if the very 
sedate Eesident of Bantam, of whom 1 am speaking, is so 
peculiar in his mode of expressing himself, that it is very 
difficult for me to sketch that, without giving myself the 
appearance of seeking to produce the effect of wit by 
means of tic? He spoke as if there stood after each 

‘ This is, when rightly spelt : ” Ga gaaiiw naar de groote gracbt,” 
*= Go quickly to the great Canal. "Grietje gooit geen gare groeta 
graag weg,”= Gertrude does not like to throw away any cooked 
vegetables. 

* Li'i'BKALLY translated = convulsive motion. 



88 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


word a period, or even a long pause ; and I cannot find a 
better comparison for the distance between his words than 
the silence which follows the “ Amen ” after a long prayer 
in church ; which is, as eveiy one knows, a signal of the 
proper time to cough or blow one’s nose. What he said 
was genei’ally well considered, and if he could have per- 
suaded himself to omit those untimely pauses, his sen- 
tences would have been, in a rhetorical point of view at 
least, passable, but all that crumbling, stuttering, and 
ruggedness, made listening to him very tedious. One 
often stumbled at it, for generally, if you commenced to 
reply, thinking the sentence finished, and the remainder 
left to your ingenuity, the remaining word.s came on as 
the stragglers of a defeated army, and made* you think 
that you had interrapted him, — un idea which is alway.s 
disagreeable. The public at Serang, such persons at least 
as were not in the service of the Government, called his 
conversation ‘ slimy,’ but Government nnplot/es were more 
circumspect. 1 do not think this word very nice, but 
1 must confess that it expressed very well t]\e principal 
quality of the llesident’s eloquence. As yet 1 have said 
nothing of Max Havelaar and his wife, — for these were 
the two persons who had alighted from the carriage after 
the Ivesident, with their child and the ‘baboe;’ and perhaps 
it might be sufficient to leave the description of their ap - 
pearance and character to the current of events and your 
proper imagination. But as I am now occupied with 



MAX HAVEL AAR. 


89 


desci-iptions, I will tell you that Madam Havelaar was not 
beautiful, hut that she still had in language and look 
something very charming, and she showed very plainly, 
by the ease of her manner, that she had been in the 
Avorld, and was at home in the higher classes of society. 
She had not that stiffness and unpleasantness of snob- 
bish re.spectability which thinks that it must torment 
itself and others with “ constraint,” in order to be con- 
sidered (IMingue ; and slic did not care much for ap- 
pearances which are thought much of by other women. 
Tn her dress too' she was an e.xample of simplicity. A 
white muslin Coadjoe^ with a blue CordcHhr , — I believe 
they call this in Europe peignoir , — was her travelling 
costume. Hound her neck she wore a thin silk cord, 
from which hung two little medallions, invisible, because 
they were concealed in the folds of her dress. Her hair 
d la Chiiioise, with a garland of mrlaii^ in the Kondek? 
-completed her toilette. 

I said that she was not beautiful, and yet I should not 
like you to think her ugly. I hope that you will find 
her beautiful as soon as I have an opportunity to show 
her to you, burning with indignation at what she called 
the " disregard of genius ” when her Max was concerned, 
or when she was animated with an idea i)i connexion Avith 
the welfare of her chihl. 


^ Dress. 

® Kondeh = chignon. 


Alelati = a beautiful and fragrant llower. 



90 


MAX UAVELAAK. 


It has too often already been said that the face is the 
mirror of the soul, for us to speak well of an immovable 
face that has nothing to reflect, because there is no soul 
reflected in it. Well, she had a noble soul, and certainly 
he must be blind who did not think her face very beau- 
tiful, when that soul could be read in it. 

Havelaar was a man of about thirty-five years. He was 
slender and activ'e in his movements ; except his very 
short and expressive upper lip, and his large pale blue 
eyes — whicli, if he was in a calm humour, had something 
dreamlike, but which flashed fire if he was animated with 
a grand idea — there was Jiothing particidar in his appear- 
ance. His light hair hung flat round his temple.s, and 1 
can believe very well, that if you saw him for the first 
time, you would not arrive at the conclusion, that there 
was a person before you possessing rare qualities Iroth of 
head and heart. He was full of contradicthms : sharp as 
a lancet, and tender hearted as a girl, he ivlways was the 
first himself to fe(d the wound whicdi his bitter words had 
inflicted; and he suffered more than the wounded. He 
was quick of compri'liension, grasped immediately the 
highest and the most intricate mattcr.s, liked to amuse 
himself with the solution of ditficult questions, and to 
such pursuits would devote all pains, study, and exertion. 
Yet often he did not understand the most simple thing, 
which a child corUd have explained to him. Full of love 
for truth and justice, he often neglected his most simple 



MAX IIAVELAAR. 


91 


and nearest obligations to remedy an injustice which lay 
higher, or further, or deeper, and which allured him more 
by the perhaps greater exertion of the strugglfe. He was 
chivalrous and gallant, but often like that other Don 
Quixote ho wasted his valour on a windmill. He burned 
with insatiable ambition, which made him look on all the 
ordinary distinctions of social life as vanities, and yet 
he considered his greatest happiness to consist in a calm, 
domestic, secluded life. He was a poet in the highest 
sense of the word ; at the sight of a spark he dreamed of 
solar systems ; peopled them with creatures of his own 
creation, felt himself to be lord of a world, which he had 
animated, and yet could immediately thereupon liave a 
conversation on the price of rice, the rules of gi’ammar, or 
the economic advantages of the Egyptian system of arti- 
ficial incubation. No science was entirely unknown to 
him : he “ guessed intuitively ” what he did not know, 
and possessed in a very high degree the gift of using the 
little he knew (every one knows a little, and he, though 
knowing more than some others, was no exception to 
this rule) in a way that multiidied the measure of his 
knowledge. He was punctual and orderly, besides being 
exceedingly patient; but precisely because punctuality, 
order, and patience were difficult to him, — his mind being 
somewhat wild,- slow and circumspect in judging of 
affairs; though this seemed not to be the case with those 
who heard him reach his conclusions so quickly. His 



92 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


impressions were too vivid to be thoiigbt durable, and yet 
he often proved that tliey were durable. All that was 
grand and ^blime allured him, and at the same time lie 
was simple and naif as a child. He was honest, above 
all things where honesty became magnanimity, and would 
have left unpaid hundreds which he owed because he had 
given away thousands. He was witty and entertaining 
where he felt that his wit was understood, but otherwise 
blunt and reserved : cordial to his friends ; a champion of 
sufferers ; sensible to lov’^e and friendship ; faithful to his 
given word ; yielding in trifles, but firm as a rock where 
he thought it worth the trouble to show character ; humble 
and benevolent to those who acknowledged his intellectual 
superiority, but trouble.some to those who desired to op- 
pose it ; candid from pride, and sometimes reserved, where 
he feared that his straightforwardness might be mistaken 
for ignorance ; ecpially susceptible to sensuous and spiri- 
tual enjoyment ; timid and ineloquent where lie thought 
he was not understood, but eloquent when he felt that his 
words fell on fertile soil ; slow when he was not urged by 
an incitement that came forth from his own .soul, but 
zealous, ardent, where this was the case; moreover, he 
was affable, polite in his manners, and blameless in 
behaviour, — such was within a little the character of 
llavelaar. 

I say, “ within a little,” for if all definitions are diffi- 
cult, this is particularly the case in the description of a 



MAX HAVELiVAK. 


93 


pei-soii who ditfcrs much from the every-day cast of 
men. 

That is also tlie reason, I think, why the poets of 
romance generally make their heroes either devils or 
angels. Black or white is easy to paint, but it is more dif- 
ficiilt to produce the varieties between these two extremes, 
when truth must be respected, and neither side coloured 
too dark or too light. I feel that the sketch wliich I 
have tried to give of Havelaar is very imperfect. The 
matei-ials before me are of so extensive a nature that they 
impede my judgment by excess of richness, and I shall 
perhaps again refer to this by way of supplement, while 
developing the events which I wish to communicate to 
you. This is certain, — he was an uncommon riian, and 
surely worthy of careful study. I see even now, that I 
have neglected to give, as one of his chief characteris- 
tics, that he understood at the same time, sind with the 
same quickness, the ridiculous and the serious side of 
things, — a ijcculiar quality, imparting unconsciously to 
his manner of speaking a soit of humour which made his 
listeners always doubt whether they were touched by the 
deep feeling that prevailed in his words, or had to laugh 
at the drollery that interrupted at once the earnestness 
of them. 

It was very remarkable that his appearance, and even 
his emotions, gave so few traces of his past life. The boast 
of experience has become a ridiculous commonplace ; there 



01 


JIAX IIAVELAAR. 


are people who have floated for fifty or sixty years in the 
stream in which they think to swim, and who can tell of 
that time little more than that they have removed from 
A Square to B Street, and nothing is more com- 

mon than to hear those very pei-sous boast of experience, 
who got their grey hairs so very easily. Other people 
think that they may found tlieir claims to experience on 
external vicissitudes, withcuit its appearing from anything 
that they have been affected in their inner life. 1 can im- 
agine that to witness, or even to take part in, import- 
ant events, may have little or no influence on the souls 
of some men. Who entertains a doubt of this, may ask 
himself if experience may be ascribed to all the inhabit- 
ants of Trance wlio were forty or fifty years old in 1815 ? 
And yet they were all persons who saw, not only the act- 
ing of the great drama which commenced in 1789, but 
had even played a more or le.ss important part in that 
drama. 

And, on the contrary, how many persons undergo a 
series of emotions without the external circumstances 
seeming to give occasion for it. Tliink of “ Uobinsou 
Crusoe,” of I’ellico’s captivity ; of the charming “ I’icciola,” 
of Saintine ; of the struggle in tlie breast of an old maid, 
who cherished through her whole life but one love, with- 
out ever betiaying by a single word what were the feel- 
ings of her heart ; of the emotions of the philanthropist, 
who, without being externally involved in the current of 



MAX IIAVELAAR. 


95 


events, is ardently interested in the welfare of fellow-citi- 
zens or fellow-creatures, the more he alternately hopes and 
fears, the more he observes every change, kindles into 
enthusiasm for a beautiful idea, and burns with indigna- 
tion if he sees it pushed away and trampled upon by 
those who, for some time at least, were stronger than 
beautiful ideas. Think of the philosopher, who from out 
his cell tries to teach the people what truth is, if he has 
to remark that his voice is overi)owered by devout hypo- 
crisy or adventurous quacks. Think of Socrates, not when 
he empties the poisoned cup — for I speak here of the 
experience of the mind, and not of that which owes its 
existence to external circumstances, — how intensely sad 
his soul must have been, when he, who loved what is 
right and true, heard himself called a corrupter of youth 
and a despiser of the gods. Or better still, think of 
Christ, gazing with sucli profound sadness on Jerusalem, 
and complaining that it “ would not ! ” 

Such a cry of grief— above that of the poisoiKul cup, or 
cross — does not come from an untried heart. There must 
have been suffering there is experience ! 

This outburst has escaped me, — it now stands, and may 
remain. Havelaar had experienced much. 'Will you have, 
for instance, something that counterbalances the removing 

from A Street ? He had suffered shipwreck more 

than once, he had experience of fire, insurrection, assas- 
sination, war, duels, luxury, poverty, hunger, cholera, love. 



96 


MAX IIAVELAAR. 


and “ loves.” He had visited France, Germany, Jlelgium, 
Italy, Switzerland, England, Spain, Portugal, llussia, Egypt, 
Arabia, India, China, and America. As to his vicissitudes, 
he had many opportunities of exj^erience, and that he had 
truly experienced mucli, tliat he had not gone through life 
without catching the impressions wliicli it offered him so 
plentifully, was evidenced by the quickness of his mind 
and the susceptibility of his soul. What excited the won- 
der of ail who knew or could conjecture how much he 
had experienced and suffered, was that you could see so 
little of that on his face. Certainly there Avas something 
like fatigue in his features, but this made you think 
rather of prematurely ripe youth than of approaching old 
age ; yet approaching old age it ought to have been, for in 
India the man of thirty-five years is no longer young. 
His emotions too had remained young, as I said before. 
He could play with a child, and a.s a child, and often he 
conudained that little Max was still too young to fly a 
kite, because he, “ great Max,” like<l that so very much. 
With boys he played “leap-frog,” and liked to draw a 
pattern for the girls' embroidery : he even often took the 
needle from them and amused himself with that work, 
though he always said that they could do something better 
than that “ mechanical counting of stitches.” With young 
men of eighteen he was a young student, liked to sing 
his Putrimn caninmn with them, or Gnudeamus i<jitur~ 
yes, I am not even quite certain, that not long ago, when 



MAX IIAVELAAR. 


97 


lie was in Amsterdam on leave, he pulled down a sign- 
board which did not please him, because a nigger was 
painted on it, chained to the feet of an European with a 
long pipe in his mouth, and under which was written, of 
course, " The smoking young merchant.” 

The "baboe’ whom he had helped out the coach resembled 
all ' baboes * in India when they are old. If you know 
that sort of servants, I need not tell you how she looked, 
and if you do not, I cannot tell you. This only distin- 
guished her from other nurses in India, that she had little 
to do ; for Madam Havelaar was an example of care for 
her child, and what there was to do for or with her little 
Max, she did herself, to the great astonishment of many 
other ladies, who did not think proper to act as slaves to 
their children.” 



CIIAPTEE VTT. 

[continuation of stp:kn's comtosition.] 

The Resident of Rantain introduced the Regent and the 
Controller to tlie new Assistant Resident. Havelaar cour- 
teously saluted botli these functionaries; the Controller 
(there is always something painful in meeting a new supe- 
rior) he placed at once at his ease with a few friendly 
words, as if he wished immediately to introduce a sort of 
familiarity that would make intercourse easy. With the 
Regent his meeting was as it ought to be with a person 
entitled to a gold fayomj} at the same time his younger 
brother. With grave affability he rebuked his too great 
civility, wliich had brought him, in such weather, to the 
confines of his district, which, according to the rules of 
etiquette, the Regent was not bound to do. 

Indeed, Mr. Adhipatti, I am angry with you for hav- 
ing given yourself so much trouble on my account. 1 

thought I should see you first at Rankas-Bctony” 

' Payonrj = iimhrclla. A mark of distinction in the East, — a gold 
one being the highest. 



MAX ITAVELAAK. 


99 


“I wished to see Mr. Assistant llcsident as soon as 
possible,” said the Adhipatti, “to make his acquaint- 
ance.” 

“ Certainly, certainly, I am obliged ; but I do not like 
to SCO a person of your rank and years exert himself too 
much and on horseback too !” 

“ Yes, Mr. Assistant Eesident ! where duty calls me, I 
am even now always active and vigorous.” 

“ That is too self-exacting is it not, Mr. Resident ? ” 

" Mr. Adhipatti ^is very ” 

“ Very well ; but there is a limit • * ” 

“ — zealous,” drawled the Resident. 

“ Very well ; but there is a limit,” Ilavelaar had to say 
again, as if to swallow the former words. “If you agree 
to it. Resident, we will make room in the canuage. The 
‘ baboe ’ can remain liere ; we will send her a tmuloo^ from 

Rankas-Betong. My wife will take Max on her lap 

won’t you. Tine ? there is room enough.” 

“ It is very ” 

“ Verbrugge, we will make room for you too ; I don’t 
see- 

“ — well,” continued tlie Resident. 

“ I don’t see why you should needlessly ride on horse- 
back through the mud ; there is room for all of us : we 

can then make acquaintance with each other can’t we. 

Tine ? — we will arrange it. Here, Max — look here, Ver- 

^ Sedan -chair (palanquin). 



100 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


brugge, is not this a pretty little fellow ? — ’tis my little 
boy, Max !” 

The Eesident had seated himself with the Adhipatti. 
Havelaar called Verbrugge to ask him who was the 
owner of that grey horse with red trappings ; and when 
Verbrugge went to the entrance of the 'pendoppo’ to see 
what horse he meant, he put his hand on his shoulder 
and asked — 

" Is the Eegeiit always so attentive ? ” 

“ He is a strong man for his yearn, Mr. Havelaar, and 
you understand that he would like to make a good im- 
pression on you.” 

" Yes, I understand that. I have heard much good of 
him ^lie is an educated man ?” 

" Oh, yes ” 

" And he has a large family ?” 

Verbnigge looked at Havelaar, as if he did not under- 
stand the transition. This style often presented difficul- 
ties to those who did not know him. The quickness of 
his mind often made him omit in conversation some links 
in the reasoning ; and although these links followed each 
other with regularity in his thoughts, he could not take 
it amiss on the part of one who was not so quick, or ac- 
customed to his quickness, if he stared at him on such an 
occasion with the unuttered question on his lips — “ Are 
you mad ? or what is the matter ?” 

Some such expression appeared in the face of Verbrugge; 



MAX HAVELAAR. 


101 


and Havelaar had to repeat the question, before the Con- 
troller replied — 

“ Yes, he has a very large family.” 

“And do they build Medjiets^ in the province?” Have- 
laar continued, again in a tone which, quite in contradic- 
tion with the words, seemed to express his belief that 
there was some connexion between these mosques and 
the large family of the Eegent. 

Verbrugge answered that indeed much labour was be- 
stowed on the mosques. 

“ Yes, yes, just as I thought,” rejplied Havelaar. “And now 
tell me if they are much in arrear with their land-taxes?” 

“ Yes, there is room for improvement ” 

“ Exactly so, and above all things in the district ‘ Par- 
ang-Koodjang,’ ” 2 added Havelaar, as if he thought it 
easier to reply himself. 

“What does the taxation of this year amount to?” he 
continued ; and Verbrugge hesitating a moment, as if to 
consider his reply, Havelaar anticipated him in the same 
breath — 

“Very well, very well, I know it already — sixty-eight 
thousand and a few hundreds — fifteen thousand more than 
last year — but only six thousand more than in the year 
1845 — we have made since 1843 an augmentation of eight 
thousand — and the population too is very thin — ^yes, in 

^ Mos(|ues. 

^ On Dutch maps of Java it is spelt “ Parang- Koedj a ug.’* 



102 


MAX IIAVELAAR. 


twelve years we have had au increase of only eleven 
per cent., and even this statement is questionable, for the 
statistics were formerly very inexactly kept — and farther ! 
— from 1850 to 1851 there is even a diminution — and the 
cattle market docs not flourish — that is a bad omen 
* * * What the deuce ! look how that liorse jumps 
and rears come here, Max ! ” 

Verbrugge saw that he would not have much to teach 
the new Assistant Eesident, and that there was no ques- 
tion of ascendency arising from “ local acquaintance,” an 
advantage which tlie good fellow had not desired. 

“ But it is a matter of course,” continued llavelaar, tak- 
ing Max in his arms ; “ in I’jikandi and Bolang they like 
it — and so do the rebels in the Lampoons.^ I recom- 
mend myself to your co-operation, Mr. Verbrugge ; the 

Eegent is a man old in years his son-in-law is still 

district-chief? All things considered, I think him to be 

a person who deserves indulgence 1 mean the Ec- 

gent 1 am very glad that there is so much poverty 

here 1 hope to remain here a long time.” 

Thereupon he shook hands with Verbrugge, and the 
latter returned with him to the table, where the Eesident, 
the Eegent, and Madam llavelaar were seated, the Con- 
troller having perceived more than five ininutes before 
that “this Mr. llavelaar was not ^such a fool” as the 

‘ Ou Dutch maps of .Jav.a, “ Laiiipongs,” but oii the Hti'jlish maps of 
Java, “ LamjKxms.” 



MAX IIAVELAAK. 


103 


Commandant thought. Verbrugge was not at all ill fur- 
nished with intellect, and he who knew the province of 
Lcbak almost as well as it is possible to know an exten- 
sive region, where nothing is printed, began to feel that 
there was surely some connexion between the apparently 
incolierent questions of Havelaar, and, at the same time, 
that the new Assistant Resident, though he had never 
been in the province, knew something of what happened 
there. Verbrugge did not understand, it is true, why he 
had rejoiced at the poverty of Lebak, but he supposed he 
had misunderstood that expression ; and aftei'wards, wlien 
llavolaar often said the same, he understood how good 
and noble was that joy. 

Havelaar and Verbrugge seated themselves at the table, 
and while drinking tea, and speaking of indifferent mat- 
ters, we all waited, till Dongso came in to tell the Resident 
that fresh horses were put to the carriage. All took their 
places as well as they could in the carriage, and off it 
went. To speak was difficult, because of the jolting and 
bruising. Max was kept quiet with pisany; ^ his mother 
had him on her lap, and would not acknowledge that 
she was tired, when Havelaar proposed to relieve her 
of the heavy boy. During a compulsory rest in a mud- 
hole, Verbrugge asked the Resident if ho had yet men- 
tioned Madam Slotering ? 

* Plantain. In the West Iiulies they are c.alled bananas. Pisang 
IS the fruit of the ]>isaiig or banaiia-trcu. 



104 


MAX IIAVELAAR. 


“ Mr. Havelaar has said ” 

“ Of course, Verbrugge, why not ? that lady can stay 
with us : I should not like ” 

“ that ^it ^was ^good,” continued the Resident, 

with much difficulty. 

“ I shoxild not like to forbid my house to a lady in such 
circumstances. That is a matter of course, — is it not, 
Tine?” 

Tine, too, was of opinion that it was a matter of course. 

" You have two houses at Eankas-Betong,” Verbrugge 
said ; “ there is room enough for two families.” 

“ But, even if this were not the case ” 

" I should not dare ” 

“ Well, Resident,” said Madam Havelaar, “ there is no 
doubt about it.” 

“ to ^promise it, for it ^is ” 

“ Were they ten of them, if they only liked to be with 
us ” 

“ a great deal of trouble and 

she is ” 

“ But to travel at such a time is an impossibility. 
Resident.” 

A heavy jolt of the carriage, just got out of the mud, 
put a point of exclamation after the declaration thdt to 
travel was an impossibility for Madam Slotering. Every 
one had said the usual “ Oh ! ” which follows such a jolt ; 
Max had recovered in his mother’s lap the ‘ pisang ’ 



MAX IIAVELAAR. 


105 


wliicli he lost by the shock, and we were already pretty 
near to the next mud-hole before the Kesident could 
resolve to finish his phrase, by adding — 

" a native ^woman.” 

“ Oh, that makes no difference,” explained Madam Have- 
laar. The Eesident nodded, as if he thought it good that 
the matter was thus arranged, and as it was so difficult 
to speak, we ended the conversation. This Madam Sloter- 
ing was the widow of llavelaar’s predecessor, who had 
died two months ago. Verbnigge, who had been charged 
axl interim with the duties of Assistant Eesident, would 
have had a right to occupy, during tliat time, the large 
mansion which had been erected at Eankas-Betong, as in 
every district, for the head of the Government. Still he 
had not done so, partly because he feared that he should 
have to remove too soon, partly that this lady with her 
children might continue to occupy it. Yet there would 
have been room enough, for besides the large mansion for 
the Assistant Eesident, there was near it, in the gi’ounds, 
another house, that had served for the same purpose for- 
merly, and though in a decayed condition, was stiU very 
inhabitable. 

Madam Slotering had asked the Eesident to intercede 
for <her with the successor of her husband, and obtain 
permission for her to inhabit that old house till after her 
confinement, which she expected in a few months. This 
was the request which had been granted so readily by 



106 


MAX IIAVELAAll. 


Havelaar and his wife, for hospitable they were in the 
highest degree. 

The Eesident had said that Madam Slotering was a 
“ native woman.” This needs some explanation for readers 
who are not acquainted with India; for otherwise they 
w'ould be apt to come to the wrong conclusion — that she 
was a Javanese woman. European society in India is very 
sharply divided into two different parts, the Europeans 
proper, and those wJio, though lawfully belonging to the 
same jurisdiction, were not born in Europe, and have 
more or less Indian blood in their veins. In honour of 
the notions of humanity prevailing in the Indies, I liasteu 
to add, that however clearly in social intercourse the dif- 
ference between the two classes of persons, both having, 
in contradistinction to the native, the name of Europeans, 
may be marked, this separation has by no means the bar- 
barous characteristic which predominates in America. I 
do not deny that there is still much injustice and exclu- 
siveness in the relation of the parties, and that the word 
sounded often in my ears as a proof how re- 
moved the white man, not being a ‘ liplap,’ often is from 
true civilisation. It is true tliat the ‘ liplap ’ is only by 
exception admitted into .society ; that lie is generally con- 
sidered, if I may be allowed to make use of a very vulgar 
expression, “ as not being thoroughh'ed ; ” but such an 

^ Tho riicknainu in India for the child of a Euroiiean and a native 
— an allusion to the protruding lii)a : liidap = nujUp. 



MAX IIAVELAAI!. 


107 


exclusion or slight is seldom defended as a principle. 
Eveiy one is at liberty to choose his own companions, and 
one cannot take it amiss in the European proper, if he 
])refers the conversation of persons of his own nationality 
to that of persons who, not to speak of the greater or less 
esteem in which they are held in society, do not agree 
with his impressions or ideas, or — and this is perhaps the 
main point, — whose prejudices have taken a different direc- 
tion from his own. 

The ‘ liplap ’ has many good qualities, so has the Euro- 
pean. Both have many bad qualities ; in this way too 
they resemble each other. But the good and bad quali- 
ties which they have are too distinctive for intercourse 
between them to be, generally speaking, productive of 
mutual satisfaction. Moreover, and this is in a great 
measure the fault of the Government, the ‘ liplaij’ is often 
very batUy educated. We are not now inquiring how the 
European would be if from youth he had been impeded in 
his mental development; but this is certain, that, generally 
speakijig, the small mental development of the ‘liidap’ 
stands in the way of his equality with the European, 
and even where an individual ‘ lijdap ’ is distinctly 
superior to a certain European, he is kept down on 
account of his origin. There is nothing new in this. It 
was a part of the policy of William the Conqueror to 
raise the most insignificant Normans above the most 
intelligent Saxons, and every Norman devoted himself to 



108 


MAX IJAVELAAR. 


furthering the ascendency of the Normans in general, for 
the advantage of himself in particular, because he often 
would have been most insignificant without the influence 
of his countrymen as the prevailing party. 

From anything of this kind arises a priori a constraint, 
which can only be removed by philosophical liberal de- 
signs on the part of the Government. 

That the European who belongs to the dominant race 
accommodates himself very easily to this artificial ascend- 
ency speaks for itself ; but it is often curious to hear a 
person who received his education in one of the lowest 
streets of Eotterdam ridicule the ‘liplap’ because he makes 
mistakes in pronunciation and grammar. A ‘liplap’ may 

be polite, well educated, or learned — there arc such 

as well as the European, who counterfeiting illness stayed 
away from the ship in which he had dishes to wash, and 
is now at the head of a commercial undertaking which 
made prodigious profits on indigo in 18 — , long before he 
had the shop in which lie sells liams and fowling-pieces 

as soon as this European perceives that the best 

educated ‘ liplap ’ has some difficulty not to confound the 
h and g, he laughs at the stupidity of the man who does 
not know what is the difference between a “ gck” and 
a “ hek ” {fool and hedge). 

But to prevent him from laughing at that, he ought 
to know that in the Arabic and Malay languages, the 
clia and the hha are expressed by one and the same sign 



MAX ITAVELAAR. 


109 


— ^that Hieronymus becomes Jerome, viS, Geronimo, that 
we make Guano out of Huano, and that we say in Dutch 
for Guild Heaume — Huillem or Willem (William). This 
is rather too much to expect of a person who made his 
fortune in the indigo trade. 

Yet such a European cannot converse with such a 
‘ liplap.’ 

I understand how Willem (William) is derived from 
Guillaume,, and must confess, that I have made acquaint- 
ance with many ‘ liplaps,’ especially in the Moluccas or 
Spice Islands, who surprised me with the extent of their 
knowledge, and who gave me the idea that we Europeans, 
whatever advantages we possess, are often, and not com- 
paratively speaking merely, much behind these poor 
pariahs, who have to struggle from their cradle upwards 
with an artificial, studied inferiority, and the prejudice 
against their colour. 

But Madam Slotering was once for all guaranteed 
against faults in the Dutch language, because she spoke 
Malay. We sliall see more of her afterwards when we are 
drinking tea with Havelaar, Tine, .and little Max in the 
fore-gallery of the Assistant Eesident’s mansion at Eankas- 
Betong, where our travelling company arrived at last safe 
and sound after having had to endure much jolting and 
bruising. 

The Kesident, who had only come along with us to 
install the new Assistant Resident in his office, intimated 



110 


MAX IIAVELAAU. 


Ilia wish to return that same day to Scrang, “ because 

he ” 

Havelaar said he was likewise disposed to make all 
possible speed. 

“ had still so much ^to do.” 

So it was arranged that we should all meet in half-an- 
hour, in the Eegent’s large front portico. Verbrugge, who 
was prepared for this, had many days ago summoned to 
the capital^ the heads of the districts, the Pattcli^ the 
Kliwon, the Djaksa, the tax-gatliercr, some ' mantries ’ — in 
a word, all the native officials who had to assist at the 
ceremony. 

The Adhipatti took his leave and drove home. Madam 
Havelaar insj)ccted her new house, and was much pleased 
with it, above all things because the garden was so large : 
wliich she liked so on account of Max, who required to 
bo much in the open air. The Eesident and Havelaar 
had retired to dress ; for at the soloninity which had to 
take place, the official costume was indispensable. Hun- 
dreds of people were assembled around the house, who 
had either followed the Ecsident’s carriage on horseback, 
or who had belonged to the retinue of the assembled 
chiefs. The police and other officials were running to 
and fro with much bustle ; in short, all indicated that the 
monotony of that secluded spot was now broken. 

^ Where ‘ capital ’ or ‘ metropolia * is used, it means the chief town 
of the district. 

- The factotum of the Regent. KllwoUj Djaksa ^ — native olficials. 



MAX IIAVELAAK. 


Ill 


Soon the handsome carriage of the Adhipatti drove up 
the yard. The Ecsident and Havelaar, glittering with 
gold and silver, but their movement somewhat impeded 
by their own swords, entered it, and drove to the Eegent’s 
mansion, where they were received with the music of 
gongs, gamlangs, and all sorts of stringed instruments. 
Verbmgge, too, who had put off his muddy costume, had 
already arrived. The inferior cliiefs, according to Orien- 
tal usage, were sitting in a great ring, on mats upon the 
ground, and at the further end of the long gallery stood 
a table, at which the Eesident, the Adhipatti, the Assist- 
ant Eesident, the Controller, and two native grandees 
took their seats. Tea and pastry were served, and the 
simple ceremony began. 

The Eesident stood up and read the decree of the 
Governor-General, whereby ;^^r. Max Havelaar was ap- 
pointed Assistant Eesident of Bantam-Kidool (South 
Bantam), as Lebak is called by the natives. lie then 
took the official paper, containing the oath which is 
required of those entering upon employments in general, 
providing, that “ To be appointed or promoted to the 

employment of , the candidate has neither promised 

nor given anything to any one, and will not promise or 
give anything ; that he Avill be loyal and faithful to his 
Majesty the King of the Netherlands, obedient to his 
Majesty’s Eepresentative in the Indies ; that he shall 
punctually obey and cause to be obeyed the laws and 



112 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


decrees that have been issued or shall be issued, and that 
he shall behave himself in everything as becomes a good 
(here Assistant Kesident).” This was of course con- 
cluded with the sacramental expression ; “ So truly help 
me God Almighty.” Havelaar repeated the words of the 
oath as read to him. The promise to protect the native 
population against oppression and extortion ought to be 
considered as included in it, for after swearing that you 
will maintain the existing laws and regulations, you have 
only to do so, and you will consider a special oath super- 
fluous. But it seems that the legislators have thought 
that abundance of fair words would do no harm, for they 
exact a special oath of the Assistant Eesidents, whereby 
that obligation is once more expressly mentioned, and 
Havelaar once more took God Almighty as a witness, that 
he “ would protect the native population against oppres- 
sion, ill-treatment, and extortion.” 

To a nice observer, it would have been worth while to 
remark the difference in tone and manner between the 
Eesident and Havelaar on this occasion. Both had often 
attended such a solemnity ; the difference which I refer 
to was not, therefore, occasioned by their being more or 
le.8S affected by a novel and unwonted spectacle, but was 
only a consequence of the very different characters of 
the two persons. The Eesident, it is true, spoke a little 
quicker than he was used to do, because he only had to 
read the decree and oaths, which saved him the trouble 



MAX IIAVKLAAK. 


113 


of seeking for the last words of what he had to say ; but 
still all went on with a gKivity and a seriousness which 
must have inspired the superficial spectator with a very 
high idea of the importance which he attached to this 
matter. 

Havelaar, on the contrary, had something in expression 
of countenance, voice, and mien, when with uidifted finger 
he repeated the oath, as if he would say, “ Of course, 
without ‘ any oath,’ 1 should do that.” Any one having 
a knowledge of men would have had more confidence in 
liis freedom from constraint than in the sedateness of the 
Resident. Is it not ridiculous indeed to think that the 
man whose vocation it is to do justice, the man into 
whose hands is given the weal or woe of thousands, 
should think himself bound by a few uttered sounds, if 
his heart does not feel itself obliged even without those 
sounds to do so ? 

We believe of Havelaar, that he would have protected 
the poor and oppressed wheresoever lie miglit meet them, 
even if ho had promised by “ God Almighty” the reverse. 

Tliereupon followed a speech of the Resident, addressed 
to the chiefs, in which he introduced to them the Assistant 
Resident as lord-paramount of the district, and irndted 
tliem to obey him, to perforin punctually their duties, 
and other commonplaces. Then tlie chiefs were pre- 
sented, every one in his turn, to Havelaar : he gave his 
hand to each of them, and the installation was at an eiul. 



114 


M.VX llAVKLAAl!. 


Diliiicv was sewed at the house of the Adhipatti, and 
the Commandant Duclavi was among the guests. Imme- 
diately after it was finislied, the Kesident, wishing to be 

the same evening at Serang, “ because lie had 

so much business,” entered again his travelling 

coach, and so Kanka.s-Betong was soon again as quiet as 
can be expected of a small town in Java, inhabited only 
by a few Europeans, and moreover far from the highway. 
Duclari and Havelaar soon became acquainted; the Ad- 
hipatti seemed to be well contented with his “ elder 
brother;” and Verbrugge said afterwards, that the Resi- 
dent also, whom he had accompanied a part of his way 
to Serang, had spoken in very favourable terms of the 
family of Havelaar, who, on their journey to Lijbak, had 
spent many days at his house ; adding, that it was easy 
to foresee that Havelaar, who was in high esteem with 
the Government, would very probably be soon promoted 
to a higher office. 

IMax and “his Tine” had recently niturned from a 
Amy age to Europe, and were tired of what 1 once heal'd 
happily described as “ tin; life of boxes.” They esteemed 
themselves, therefore, very happy, to inhabit at last, after 
many changes, a s])ot when; they were at Imme. 

Before this voyage to Eurojie, Havelaar had been 
Assistant Kesident at Amboyna, where he had to struggle 
Avith many difficulties, because tin; po[)ulalion of that 
i.sland Avas in a state of excitement and revolt, in conse 



MAX HAVKLAAH. Ilf) 

quoiice of the many bad. measures which had of late been 
taken; he had, witli much energy, succeeded in repressing 
that spirit, but from vexation at the little assistance 
which the Government gave him in that affair, and from 
sorrow over the bad government which for many centuries 
has depopulated and corrupted the magnificent Moluc- 
cas (the reader should try if he can get to read what 
was written on that subject by the Ikron Van dev Capel- 
len in —the publications of this philanthropist are to 
be found in the Indian ohicial papeis of that year, and 
affairs have not since inqnoved), from sorrow for all this 
lie had become ill, and tliis had induced him to leave for 
Europe. Strictly considered, he had a right to a better 
choice than the poor uiiptroductive district of Lebak, be-* 
cause his ollicc at Amboyna was of more im])ortance, and 
there, without an A.ssistant Kosident as his superior, he 
had managed all the business himself. ^Moreover, long 
before he went to Amboyna, it was said that he would 
ho ap])(»inted Kesident, and, thcx-efore, many were aston- 
ished that he got a district which gave him so little 
emolument, because many measure the importance of a 
function by the revenues it produces. Yet he himself 
ilid not complain about that. His ambition was not of 
the kind that lu’ should ever play the beggar for <‘i higher 
office or more money. 

Yet the latter would have: been useful to him, for in his 
voyages to Euro])c he had s])ent the little money which 



116 


MAX IIAVELAAK. 


he had saved in former years ; he had even been obliged 
to leave debts behind, and he was, in a word, poor. But 
never had he considered his employment as a source of 
emolument, and when appointed at Lebak, he intended 
with contentment to pay up his arrears by economy ; in 
which intention his wife, who was also simple in tastes 
and necessities, willingly seconded him. 

But economy was a difhcult thing to Ilavelaar. As 
for himself, he could be content with the bare necessaries 
of life ; yea, even with less ; but where others were in 
want of assistance, to help, to give, was a strong passion 
with him. He himself was aware of this foible ; he con- 
sidered M'ith all tlie common-sense he had, how unjustly 
he acted in succouring any one, when he himself had 
a better claim to his own assistance, and felt this in- 
justice the more when his Tine and Max, both of Avhom 
he loved so dearly, suffered through the consequence ol’ 
Ins liberality. lie often reproached himself for his good 
nature as a foible, as vanity, as a desire to be considered 
a prince in disguise : he i>romisod amendment, and yet, 
whenever any one presented himself to his notice as the 
victim of adversity, he forgot all and helped him. Yet 
he had some bitter experience of the consequences of this 
too far-stretched virtue. A week before the birth of his 
little Max he had not money enough to buy the iron 
cradle wherein liis darling was to rest; and a little before 
he liad sacrificed tlie few ornaments of liis wife, to assist 



MAX IIAVELAAB. 


ii: 

•somebody who was certainly in better circumstances 
than he. 

But all this was far behind them when they arrived at 
Lebak. With a joyful calmness they had taken posses- 
sion of the house, “ where they hoped now to remain for 
some time.” With peculiar satisfaction they had ordered 
the furniture at Batavia ; they would make all so comfort- 
able and sniig. They showed each other the places where 
they should breakfast; where little Max should play; 
where the library should be ; where ho should read in the 
evening to her what he had written that day; — for he 
was always occupied in developing his ideas on paper — 
and wlion once these were printed, she thought that 

" people woxxld sec what her Max was ” But he had 

never given anything to the press, on account of scruples 
arising from modesty. He himself, at least, diil not know 
how better to express that timidity, than by asking those 
who urged him to publicity, “ Would you let your 
daughter walk the streets without a chemise ?” 

This was another saying which made his circle say 
“ that Havelaar was a singidar man,” and I do not say 
the contrary ; but if you took the trouble to interpret his 
uncommon manner of speaking,- you woidd perhaps find 
in that strange question about a girl’s dress the text for 
a treatise on intellectual modesty, which, shy of the 
glances of dull passers-by, retires behind the veil of 
maidenly timidity. 



118 


MAX IIAVKLAAR. 


Yes, they should be happy at Eankas-Betong, Ilave- 
laar and his Tine ! Tiie only care that oppressed them 
was the debts which they had left behind in Europe, 
augmented by the still unpaid expenses of the voyage 
back to the Indies, and of the furnishing of their house. 
But they would live on half, even a third of his income 

perhaps lie would soon be made Besident, and then 

all would be arranged in a few years 

“ Yet I should be sorry. Tine, to leave Lcbak ; for I 
have many things to do here. You must be very econo- 
mical, my dear, and perhaps we may pay off all even 

without promotion then I hope to remain here for a 

long time.” 

Xow she needed no incitement to economy. It was 
not her fault that frugality had become nece.ssary; but she 
had so completely identified herself with her Max that 
she did not consider this speech os a r(*proach, which, to 
be sure, it was not ; for Havelaar knew very well that 
he alone had been wrong through excossiA'^e liberality, 
and that her fault was this,— if fault there was on her 
side, — that she, out of love for her Max, had always 
approved of all that he did. 

Yes, she had ajiproved when he took those two poor 
women from the Miciiwstraat (New Street), who had never 
before left Amsterdam, and never had been out, to the 
Haarlem fair, under the odd pretext that the King had 
ordered him “ to amuse little old women of re.spectable 



MAX HAVKLAAK. 


119 


character.” She approved of his entertaining the orphans 
of all the asylums in Amsterdam with gingerbread and 
almond-milk, and loading them with playthings. She 
perfectly understood that he had paid the hotel-bill of 
that family of poor singers, wh6 wanted to go back to 
their country, but did not like to leave the goods behind, 
including the harp, and the violin, and the violoncello, 
which they wanted for their poor profession. She could 
not disapprove his bringing to her the girl, who in the 
evening had accosted liim in the street, giving her food 
and lodging, and not pronouncing the “ Go and sin no 
more!” before he had placed it in her power not to sin. 
She approved of her Max causing the piano to be brought 
back to the parlour of the father of a family, whom she 
heard say “ how soiTy he was that by his bankruptcy the 
girls w(!re deprived of their music.” She quite understood 
that her Max had redeemed the family of slaves at 
Menado who were so intensely afflicted at having to 
mount upon the auctiom'cr’s table. She thought it quite 
a matter of course that Max gave other horses in return 
for those that had been ridden to death by the ofllcers of 
the Bayonnaise. She did not object to his lodging at 
Menado and at Amboyna all the survivoi's of the ship- 
wrecked American whalers, and thought himself far above 
sending in an innkeeper’s bill to the American Govern- 
ment. She understood how it was that the officei-s of 
every man-of-war that arrived lodged for the most part 



120 


^fAX IIAVELAAR. 


Ayitli Max, and that his house was their favourite picd-d- 
t-crrc. Was not he Iwr INfax ? — Was it not too petty, too 
shabby, too absurd, to bind him, who had such princely 
notions, to the rules of frugality and economy applicable 
to other persons ? And moi'eover, although there might 
sometimes be a disproportion between revemies and ex- 
penses, was not Max, “ her Max,” destined for a brilliant 
career ? — Ought not he to be soon in a position which 
would allow a free course to his high-minded passions 
withoxxt exceeding his rewenues ? Was not her Max 
destined to become a Governor-General, or a King ? 
Nay, was it not strange that he was noi, yet a King ? If 
she had any fault at all, it was her deep affection for 
Havelaar ; and hei’c more than ever it should be : that 
much must be forgiven those who have loved much ! 

But there was nothing which she had to b'j forgiven. 
AVithout participating in the exaggerated ideas which 
she cherished aboxit her Alax, it appeared sufficiently evi- 
dent that he had good prospects, and that, when these 
prosjjects were realized, the disagreeable consequences of 
liis liberality would soon vanish. But yet another reason 
excused liis apparent carelessness and hers. At an early 
age slie had lost both parents, and had been educated by 
her fathei'’s relativ(‘S. At the time of her marriage, they 
told her that slio Iiad a sxnall fortune, which was accord- 
ingly handed over to her ; but Havelaar discovered, from 
some letters of earlier date, and from some loose notes 



MAX IIAVFJAAU. 


121 


which she kept in a writing-desk that had belonged to 
lier niothei’, that her fiiinily had been veiy rich ; but he 
could not make out where, or how, this wealth had been 
lost. She, who had never herself taken any interest in 
money matters, could give little or no information on this 
subject. Wlicn Havelaar insisted upon some information 
concerning the fonner possessions of her family, he found 
that her grandfather, the Baron W., had emigrated with 
William vi.^ to England, and had been captain in the 
army of the Duke of York. It seemed that he had led 
a jolly life with the emigrant members of the Stadt- 
holder’s household, which was considered by many to 
have occasioned the decline of his fortxxnes. He was 
afterwards killed at Waterloo, in a combat among the 
liussars of Boreel. The lettei’s of her father, then a young 
man of eighteen, were touching to read, — as lieutenant of 
t hat corps, he had received in the same charge a sabre-cut 
on the head, from the consequences of which he died 
(iight years afterwards in a state of madness, — letters 
to his mother, in which he lamented how he had sought 
in vain for his father’s corpse. 

She remembered that her grandfather on the mother’s 
side had lived in very high style, and it appeared from 
some papers that he had been in possession of the post- 

' Willem, rriiiee of Orange, Stadtlioldor of the United Provinces, 
was obliged to leave liis country in the year 1795, because of the 
revolution ; he died at FuMa in 1800. 



122 


MAX HA VELA AH. 


-offices in Switzerland, in the same manner as till now, in 
a great part of Germany and Italy, this branch of revenue 
is an appanage of the princes of Tour and Taxis. Hence 
a large fortune was to be expected ; but from some en- 
tirely unknown causes, nothing, or very little at least, was 
handed over to the second generation. 

Havelaar did not learn the little that could bo known 
of this matter till after his marriage ; and while investi- 
gating it, lie was surprised that the said writing-desk, 
with the contents, which she preserved from a feeling of 
filial love, without knowing that it perhaps contained 
papers of importance in a financial point of view, had 
incomprehensibly disappeared. Disinterested as he was, he 
liuilt on this and many other circumstances the idea that 
a romantic, story was hidden in the background ; and one 
cannot be angiy with him that he, wdio Avas in want of so 
much for his style of living, desired that this romance 
should have a happy end. However this may be, whether 
there had been spoliation or not, it is certain that in 
Havelaar’s imagination something was produced which 
one could call — nn revc aux millions. 

It is again strange, that he who would have so care- 
fully examined and so sharply defended the right of 
another, though it might have been buried very deep 
beneath dusky papers and thick-webbed chicanery, here, 
where his own interest was at stake, carelessly neglected 
the moment Avhen he ought to have taken the matter up. 



MAX HAVELAAK. 


123 


It seemed as if he was ashamed of it, because it concerned 
here his own interest, and I believe for certain, that had 
“his Tine” been married to another, and he been in- 
trusted to break the cobweb in which her ancestral for- 
tunes remained hanging, Havelaar would have succeeded 
in putting “ the interesting orphan” in the possession of 
the fortune she was entitled to. But now this interesting 
orphan was his wife ; her fortune was his : and he thought 
it something mean and degrading, something derogatory, 
to ask in her name, “ Don’t you owe me sometliing 
more, ?” 

Yet he co\dd not shake off this dream of ‘ millions,’ were 
it only to liave an excuse at hand for the often repeated 
self-reproach that he spent too much money. 

But a short time before returning to Java, when he had 
already suffered much under the pressure of impecunio- 
sity, when he had to bow liis proud head under the fima 
camlina of many a creditor, he succeeded in conquering 
his idleness or shyness, ami set lumself to work for the 
millions to which he still thought he had a right. And 
they sent him in reply a long-standing bill, an argu- 
ment against which, as everybody knows, nothing can 
be said. 

But they wordd be economical at Lebak. And vdiy not ? 
In such an uncivilized countiy you will not see girls in 
the streets who have a little honour to sell for a little 
food. There you will not meet persons who live on pro- 



124 


MAX HAVEL AAR. 


blematic employments. There it does not happen, that a 

family suddenly loses all through a change of fortune 

and of this kind were generally the rocks on which the 
good intentions of Havelaar had made sliipwreck. The 
number of Europeans in this district was too small to be 
noticed ; and the Javanese at Lebak were too poor to be- 
come interesting through any increase of poverty. Tine 
did not think of all this ; for then she ought to have 
thought more than her love for Max permitted of the 
causes of their less favourable circumstances. There was 
something, however, in their new surroundings that 
breathed a calm, an absence of all cases of falsely 
romantic appearance, which had made Havelaar so often 
say in former days : Is not this, Tine, a case from which 
I cannot withdraw And the answer always was : Cer- 
tainly, Max, you cannot witlidraw from it.'’ 

AVe shall see liow the simple, apparently still life of 
I.ebak, cost Havelaar more tlian all the former excesses 
of his heart taken together. 

But that they did not know ! They expected the future 
with confidence, and were so happy in tlieir love, and in 
the possession of their child. 

''How full this garden is of roses!" said Tine, "and 
look at the ranipeh, and tjcmpalm, and mdati} and beau- 
tiful lilies- — 

And children as they were, they were delighted with 
^ Flowers. 



MAX HAVELAAli. 


125 


their new house ; and when in the evening IJuclari and 
Verbrugge, after a visit to Havelaar, returned to their 
common home, they made many remarks on the childlike 
joy of the newly arrived family. 

Havelaar went to his office, and remained there till the 
next morning. 



C II APTEK VIII. 

[continuation of stern’s composition.] 

Haveeaar luul retiuosied the Controller to invite the 
chiefs who werii at Eankas-Betong to stay tlicre till the 
next (lay to he jR’Psent at tlie Srb((h (council) whicli he 
intended to convene. Such a council generally took place 
once a mouth ; but cither because he wished to spare some 
chiefs who lived very far from the capital the unne- 
cessary journey to and fro, or because he wished to speak 
to them immediately impressively, and without waiting 
for the appointed day, he chose the next morning for the 
first Sebah. 

To the left of his mansion, luit in the same grounds, and 
opposite the house which i\[adam Hloteriiig occupied, stood 
a building, part of wliich was used for the ottices of the 
xissistant liesident, where was also the Treasury. This 
building contained a large (.)peu gallery, which made it a 
very good place for such a council. Tliere the chiefs 
assembled betimes in the mcn-iiing. JIavelaar entered, 
saluted, and sat down. He received the written reports 



MAX HAVELAAK. 


127 


on agriculture, police, and justice, and put them aside for 
after examination. 

Every one expected an address such as the Kesident 
had delivered the day before, and it was not quite certain 
that Havelaar himself intended to say anything else to 
the chiefs ; but . you ought to have seen him on such 
occasions to conceive how he, at speeclies like those, grew 
excited, and, thrtmgh his peculiar way of speaking, com- 
inutiicated a new cohnir to the most common things ; 
how he became taller, so to speak, how his glance shot 
fire, how his voice passed from a flattering softness to a 
lancet sharpness, how the metaphors flowed from his lips, 
as if he was scattering some precious commodity round 
about him, which, however, cost him nothing, and how, 
when he ceased, every one looked at liim with an open 
mouth, as if asking, ‘‘Good God! who are you?” 

It is true that he himself who spoke on such occasions 
as an apostle, as a seer, afterwards did not exactly know 
liow he had spoken, and his eloquence was therefore 
more powerful to astonish and to touch, than to con 
vince by solid argument. He would have excited the 
martial spirit of the Athenians to frenzy as soon as tliey 
had de(dd(Hl to go to war with Philip ; but lie would 
not have succeeded so well, if it had been his task to 
incite them to this war through cogency of reasoning. 
11 is harangue to th(> chiefs of Lebak was of course in 
^lalay, a circumstance which added greatly to its effect. 



128 


MAX HAVfXAAR. 


because the simplicity of the Oriental tongues gives to 
many expressions a force which has been lost in the 
greater formality of the languages of the West; whilst, 
on the other hand, it is difficult to render the sweetness 
of the Malay in any other language. We must, moreover, 
take into consideration, that the greater part of liis lis- 
teners consisted of simple, but not at all stupid men, and 
at the same time Orientals, whose impressions differ con- 
siderably from our own. 

llavclaar spoke almost as follows : — 

" Mr. Eadeen Adhipatti,^ Regent of Bautam-Kidool,'-^ 
and you Radeens Demang, that are chiefs of the districts 
of this province, and you Radeen Djaksa, administrator of 
justice, and you too, Radeen Kliwon, governor of the chief 
town, and you Radeens, Mantries, and all that are chiefs 

in the district of Bantam-Kidool 1 salute you. 

“ And 1 tell you that 1 feel joy in my heart when 1 see 
you all assembled, and listening to the words of my mouth. 

“ I know that there are amongst you men who e-vcel in 
knowledge and goodness of heart : I hope to enlarge my 
knowledge by contact with yours ; for it js iiot so gi-eat 
as I should wish ; and I certainly love probity, but I per 
ceive that there are often in niy soul faults that ovei-- 
shadow the probity, and hinder the growth ; for you knou' 

' Titles — inii(os.sible to translate them into European lanj'iia^es. 
Jiadeeti or lifulken almost = the French (Jhi't'dllrr. 

Bantam-Kidool = South Bantam - Lehak. 



MAX HAVELAAK. 


129 


how the large tree pushes away and kills the little tree. 
Therefore I shall look to those amongst you who excel in 
virtue, to try to become better than I am. 

“ I heartily salute you all. 

“ Wlien the Governor-General commanded me to come 
to you as Assistant Resident in this district, my heart 
rejr)iced. You know tliat I had never set foot on Ban- 
tam-Kidool ; therefore I have obtained information about 
your district, and have seen that there is mucli good in 
Baiitam-Kidool. Your people possess rice-fields in the 
valleys, and there are rice-fields on the mountains. And 
you wish to live in peace, and you do not desire to 
live in those districts tluit are inhabited by other per- 
sons. Yes, 1 know that tliere is much good i/i Bantam- 
Kidool. 

“ But not on that account alone did my heart rejoice ; 
for elsewhere, also, 1 should have found much good. 

“ But I discovered that your populatit)U is poor, ami 
therefore I rejoiced with all my soul. 

“ 1 or I know that Allah loves the poor, and that He 
gives riches to whomsoever He will try ; but to the poor 
He sends all who speak His word, that they may rise in 
the midst of their misery. 

“ Does not He give rain when the blade would other- 
wise wither, and a dewdrop in the cup of the thirsty 
flower ? 

" And is it not sublime to be sent to seek them that 

I 



130 


MAX IIAVELAAl!. 


are weary, who have lingered behind after the work and 
have fallen down exhausted on the road, beeause their 
knees were not strong enough to carry them to the place 
where they should receive their wages ? Should not I be 
glad to give a helping hand to him whp tumbled into the 
ditch, and a staff to him who climbs the mountains ? 

“ Should not my heart leap with joy when it sees that 
1 have been selected amongst many to turn lamentation 
into prayer, weeping into thanksgiving ? 

“Yes, I am very glad to be in Bantam -Kidool. 

“ I said to the woman who shares my sorrows and 
increases my happiness : — 

“ ‘ Rejoice, for I see that Allah gives a blessing on the 
head of our child! He has sent me to a place where 
work is to be done, and He thought me worthy to be 
there before harvest-time. For the joy is not in cutting 
paddy ; ^ the joy is in cutting the paddy which one has 
planted. And the .sOul of man does not rejoice in wages, 
but in the labour that earns those wages.’ And I said 
to her : ' Allah has given us a child ; and there will come 
a time when he shall say : “Do you know that I am fm 
son ? ” and then there will be those in the country who 
will greet him Avith love, who will put a hand on his 
head and say : “ Sit down to our dinner, ami live in our 
house, and take your portion of what we have ; for we 
knew your father.” ’ 

* Paddy — rice iu the field. 



MAX HAVELAAR. 


131 


“ For, chiefs of Lcbak, there is nuich to he clone in your 
district. 

“Tell me, is not the hihourcr poor? Does not your 
paddy often ripen for those who did not plant it ? Are 
there not many wrongs in your country ? Is not the 
jiumber of your children small ? 

“ Is there no shame in your souls when the natives of 
Bolang, which lies over there in the East, visit your 
countiy, and ask, ‘ Wlieie are the villages, and where the 
Imsbandmen, and why do not I hear the gamhing^ which 
speaks joy out of a mouth of brass, nor the stamiung 
of paddy by your daughters ? ’ 

“ Is there no bitterness in journeying from here to the 
South coast, in seeing the mountains that have no water 
on their side.s, or the plains where the buffalo never drew 
the plough ? 

“ Yes, yes, I tell you, that your soul and mine are sad 
because of these things ; and, therefore, 'we are grateful to 
Allah, that He has given us the power to labour here. 

“ For we have in this country fields for many, though 
the inhabitants are few. And it is not the rain which 
fails, for the summits of the mountains suck the clouds of 
heaven to the earth. And not everywhere are rocks that 
refuse a place to the root ; for in many places the ground 
is soft and fertile, and calls for the grain, which it is 
willing to return you in a bended blade. And tfiere is 
^ Gauilaiffj = musical instrumciil. 



132 


MAX HAVFXAAR. 


no war in the country, whereby tlie paddy is trodden 
down wliile yet green, nor is there sickness to paralyse 
i\vi paijol} Neither are the sunbeams more powerful than 
is necessary to ripen the grain, that has to be food for 
you and your children ; nor hanjcrs,^ that make you say, 
‘ Show me the place where I have sown.’ 

“ Where AUah sends imindations tliat wash away the 
fields ; where He hardens the ground as barren stones ; 
wliei’e He makes the sun burn even to scorching ; where 
He sends war to devastate the fields ; where He slays 
■W'ith diseases, that make the liands weak, or with diyness 

that kills the corn there, chiefs of Lebak, we bend 

our heads, and say : ‘ His muU be done !’ 

• “ But it is not so in Bantam-Kidool. 

“ I have been sent here to be your friend, your elder 
brother. Should not i/ou warn your young(!r brother, if 
you saw a tiger in hi.s way ? 

“ Chiefs of Lebak, we have often committed faults, and 
our country is poor, because we have committed so many 
faults. 

“For in Tjikaiidi, Bolaiig, and Krawang, in the rcgiou.‘f 
round about Batavia, there are many men who were born 
in our country, and who have left our country. 

“ Why do they seek labour far from the place where 
they buried their parents ? Why have they fled from the 
village where they were circumcised ? Why do they 
^ Patjol = spade. * Banjers = inundations. 



MAX HAVELAAR. 


133 


prefer the coolness of the tree that grows then'e, to the 
sliade of our woods ? 

“ And even there to the North-West, over the sea, are 
many who ought to be our children, but who have left 
Lebak to wander in foreign countries with Kris} and 
Khivang} and gun ! And there they die miserably ; for 
the Government has power to beat the rebels. 

“ I ask you, chiefs of Lebak, why have many gone 
away, not to be buried where they were born ? Why does 
the tree ask, ‘ Where is the man whom I saw playing at 
my foot when a child ?’ ” 

Havelaar waited here for a moment. To understand in 
some degree the impression which his words made, one 
ought to have heard and seen him. Wlren he spoke of 
his child, there was a softness in his voice, something that 
was extremely touching, and which allured you to ask, 
“ Where is the little one ? 1 will at once kiss the child, 

that made his father speak so but when he soon after- 
wards passed with little order to the questions why Lebak 
was poor, and why so many inhabitants of these regions 
removed to other places, there was in his tone something 
which made you think of the noise that a drill makes 
when forcibly tunied in hard wood. Vet he did not speak 

‘ Kris = Indian weapon. 

^ Kkwimj = Indian weapon. “ To w.inder in foreign countries with 
Kris, and Klewang, and gun,” means here, that those persons go 
into other Residencies, where rebels are in ai-ms against the Ooverii- 
inent. 



134 


MAX HAVELAAK. 


very loud, neither did he put any stress on certain words ; 
there was even something monotonous in his voice, but 
whether studied or natural, which by this very monotony 
made the impression of his words stronger on minds that 
were so particularly sensitive to such a language. His 
metaphors, which he always borrowed from the life that 
• surrounded him, were to him as allies to make what he 
meant perfectly understood, and not, as often happens, 
troublesome appendages, which burden the phrases of 
orators, witliout adding any plainness to the conception 
of what is meant to b(' illustrated. We are now-a-days 
accustomed to the absurdity of the ex])ression “ Strong 
as a lion;” but lie wlio firat used this metaphor in 
Kiu'ope, showed that lu' had not drawn the {comparison 
from the poetry of the soul, which furni.shes figures of 
speech, and cannot speak otherwise, but that lie had 
simply copied this from some hook, — from the Hible, 
perhaps, — in which a lion "was numtiom'd. For none of 
his hearers ever t ried the strength of the lion, and it 
would therefore liave been ratlucr necessary to make them 
eistimate that strength, by (comparing tlio lion to some 
otlier ci’eature whose strength M'as known to them, than 
otherwi.se. 

You see, that Havelaar v’as truly a poet, that he, speak- 
ing of the rice-fields, tliat were on the mountains, directed 
his eyes thither through the open side of the hall, and 
that he really stood there; and in the imagination of 



MAX HAVELAAR. 


135 


Havelaar’s hearers he really looked about and asked for 
the inhabitants of Lebak that had gone. He invented 
nothing ; he heard the tree speak, and only thought that 
he repeated what he imagined to have heard so distinctly 
in his poetical inspiration. 

Should any one, perhaps, be inclined to make the 
obseiwation, that the originality of Havelaar’s manner of 
speaking is not so indisputable, as his language makes 
you think of the style of the prophets of the Old Testa- 
njent, I must remind him of what I said before, that in 
moments of ecstasy he was indeed something of a seer, 
and that he, fed by the impressions communicated to 
him by living in forests and on mountains, and by the 
poesy-breathing atmosphere of the East, would probably 
not have spoken otherwise, even if he had never read 
the sublime poems of the Old Testament. 

Do we not find, in tlie ver.ses written by him in early 
youth, lines like the following, which were composed on 
the Salak — one of the highest summits of the Preangan 
Regencies, - in the exordium of whicli he displays the 
softness of his emotions, and then suddenly passes to 
the description of the thunder which he hears below 
him 

“ ’Tis sweeter liere our Maker loud to praise ; 

Pmyer sounds more beautiful among the hills 
Than in the plains. Upon the mountain top 
The heart is nearer to its Uod, who makes 



136 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


Unto Himself an altar and a fane. 

Unsullied by the foot of human pride. 

’Tis here He makes the rattling tempest heard — 
Summons His rolling thunder — Majesty !” 

T)o you not feel that he canild not have written the 
last two lines if he had not really heard God’s thunder, 
dictating to liim in reverberating crashes along the 
mountain sidi^s ? 

But he did not like to write poetry ; it was, as he said, 
“ like putting on a stiff comet,” and when he was induced 
to read anything of what he had written, he took pleasure 
in abusing his own work, either by reading in a ridiculous 
tone, or by stopping short at a most solemn place, and 
throwing in a pun which shocked his hearers. This was 
nothing more than a satire upon the disproportion be- 
tween his soul and the cm'srt which confined it. 

Havelaar had oi-dcred by a sign the customary tea and 
sweetmeats ; but few of the (hi<‘fs partoijk of the refresh- 
ments. It appears that he had paused with premedita ■ 
tion at the end of his .speech ; and there was a reason 
for it. What must the chiefs have thought of his know- 
ing already that so many had left Lebak with bittcnu'ss 
in their hearts ? of his knowing already how many 
families had emigrated to neighbouring countries to avoid 
the poveify that raigncd here ? and of his knowing the 
fact that there are so many Bantammers amongat the 
bands in revolt against the Dutch Government? WHiat 



MAX IIAVKLAAl?. 


137 


does he mean ? wliat is he aiming at ? who is concerned 
in his questions ? 

And some of them looked at the district chief of Parang- 
Koodjang. But most of them looked at the ground. 

“Come hero, Max,” said Havelaar, who perceived his 
child playing before the house, and the Adhipatti took 
the boy on liis knee ; but lie was too wild to remain there 
long; he jumped away and ran round the large circle 
amusing the cliiefs with his talk, and playing with the 
hilts of their weapons. When he came up to the Djaltsa} 
who excelled all the others in his uniform, and thereby 
attracted the child, the Djaksa showed something on little 
Max’s head to the Kliv'on^ who sat near him, and ivho 
seemed to assent to an oliservation about it. 

“ Go away now, Max,” Havelaar said ; “ papa has some- 
thing to say to these gentlemen,” and the little boy ran 
away, kissing his hands to them. 

“ Chiefs of Lebak ! we are all of us in the sendee of the 
King of Holland. Rut he, who is just, and desires that 
we should penform our duty, is far from here. Thirty 
times a thousand thousand souls, miy more, are under his 
rule, but he cannot be near all of those who ai'e dependent 
tm his will. 

“ The Governor-General at Buitenzorg^ is just, and 

’ Administrator of Justice. 

^ Governor of the Capital, or chief town. 

* The Kesideuce of the Governor-General near Batavia. 



138 


MAX HAVELAAR, 


desires that every one should do his duty ; but powerful 
as he is, and commanding all authority in the cities, and 
the elders of the villages, and disposing of the army on 
land, and of the ships at sea, he likewise can no more 
than the King see where injustice has been done, for the 
injustice is far from him. 

“ And the Resident at Serang, who is lord of the Resi- 
dency of Bantam, where live five times a hundred thou- 
sand men, desires that justice shall be done in his 
dominion, and that righteousness shall reign in those 
parts that obey him. But where injustice has been done 
he lives far from it, and whoever does wickedly, hides 
himself from his face because he fears punishment. 

“ And Air. Adhij>atti, who is Regent of South Bantam, 
wills that every one does good, and that there shall be no 
infamy in that country over which lie is Regent. 

“ And I, who yesterday called God Almighty to witness 
that I would be just and merciful, that 1 would maintain 
justice without fear or haired, that I woidd be ‘ a good 
Assistant Resident,’ 1 wish to do my duty. 

“ Chiefs of Jjobak ! we all wish to do our duty. 

“ But if there should be amongst us any who neglect 
their duty for gain, who .sell the Right for money, or who 
take away the buffalo from the poor, and bread from 
those who are hungry who .shall punish them ? 

“ If any of 3-011 knew it, he would stop it, and the Regent 
would not suffer such an inju, slice to he done in his 



MAX IIAVELAAK. 


139 


Eegeucy, and I myself should oppose it where 1 could, 
hut if neither you, nor the Eegent, nor I knew it 

“ Chiefs of Lehak ! who shall then do justice in Ban- 
tam-Kidool ? 

“ Hear me, and I will tell you how justice would be 
done in such a case. 

“ There comes a time when our wives and children shall 
weep while preparing our shroud, and the passers-by shall 
say, ‘ A man has died there.’ Then he udio arrives in the 
villages shall bring the news of the death of him that has 
died, and the person who lodges him shall ask, ‘ Who was 
the man that died ? ’ 

“ ‘ He was good and just. He did justice, and drove not 
the suppliant from his door. He listened patiently to all 
who came to him, and returned that which had been taken 
away. And him who could not jdough his land, because 
the buffalo had lieen taken out of his stables, he assisted 
to seek for the buffalo ; and where the daughter had been 
carrif'd off' from the house of lu'r mother, he sought the 
thief and brought the daughter back. And where work 
had been done, he did not withhold the wages, nor take 
away the fruit of him who jdantiul the tree, nor the coat 
that was another’s, nor eat the food that belonged to the 
Itoor.’ 

Then it shall be said in the villages 

“‘Allah is great: Allah has taken him home. His will 
be done : a good man has dieil’ 



140 


MAX HA^^?LAAR. 


“ But again the passenger shall stand before a house and 
ask, ‘What is this, that the gamlang is silent, and the 
song of the maidens is hushed ? ’ And again it shall be 
said, ‘ A man has died.’ 

“ And whosoever journeys to the villages, shall sit in the 
evening witli the host, and round about him the sons and 
daughters of the house, and the children of those who live 
in the village, and he shall say : — 

“‘A man has died, who promised to be just; and he 
sold justice to every one who gave liim money. He 
watered his field with the sweat of the labourer whom he 
had called away from his own labour. He did not pay the 
labourer his wages, but lived on the food of the poor. 
He became rich from the poverty of others. He had 
much gold and silver, and plenty of precious stones ; 
but the labourer who lives in the neighbourhood did 
not know how to a])perise the hunger of his child. He 
smiled like a happy man ; but there was gnashing of the 
teeth from the suppliant who sought justice. There was 
contentedness on his features ; l)ut there was no milk in 
the breasts of the mothers who would fain have given 
suck.’ 

“ Then the people of the villages will say : - 

“ ‘ Allah is great we curee no one ! ’ 

“ Chiefs of Lebak ! there comes a time when aii of us 
must die ' 

“ What shall be said in the villages where we have 



M.VX ILVVELAAl?. 


141 


liad power, and what by the bystanders who witness the 
funeral ? and what shall we answer if, after death, a voice 
speaks to our soul, and asks, ‘ Wliy is there weeping in 
the fields, and how is it that the young men hide them- 
selves ? Who took the harvest out of the barn, and the 
buffalo that should have ploughed the fields out of the 
stall? What have you done with your brother whom 
I gave you to v'atch over? Why is the poor man sad? 
Wliy docs he curse the fruitfulness of his wife ? ’ ” 

irorc Ilavelaar paused again for a few moments; and 
tlien continued, in the most simple tone possible, and as if 
nothing had been said to make an impression : — 

“ I wish to live on good terms with you, and therefore 
1 beg you to regard me as your friend. Kveiy one who 
has erred may reckon on a lenient sentence from me, foi' 
as I err so often myself, T shall not be severe ; at least not 
in ordinary mistakes or negligences. Only where negli- 
gence becomes a custom, 1 will oppose it. Of faults of a 

more grave kind of tyranny and extortion, I do not 

speak- -such a thing shall not happen; is it not so, 
Kegcnt ? ” 

“ Oh no, Mr. Assistant Itesidcnt, such a thing shall not 
happen in Lcbak.” 

“ Well then, gentlemen, chiefs of Bantam-Kidool ! let us 
be glad that our province is so poor. We have a noble 
Avork before us. If Allah preserve us alive, we shall take 
care that prosperity comes. The ground is fertile enough. 



142 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


the population willing ; if every one is suffered to remain 
in the enjoyment of the fruits of his labour, there is no 
<loubt that within a sliort time the population will im- 
prove, as well both in the number of souls as in posses- 
sions and civilisation, for these tilings generally go hand 
in hand. 1 beg yoxi again to regard me as a friend who 
will help you where he can, above all where injustice 
must be prevented. And noAV 1 commend myself to your 
co-operation. 

“ T will return to you the reports I have received on 
agriculture, cattle-breeding, police, and justice, with my 
orders. 

“ Chiefs of Lebak! I have said. You can return every 
one to his home. 1 cordially greet you all.” 

He bowed, offered his arm to the old Kegent, and con- 
ducted him to his house, where Tine awaited him in the 
gallery. 

“ Come, Verbrugge, don’t go home yet. Come, a glass 

of jMadeira ! And, yes, 1 mv^t know that Ihule.en 

Djaksa ! stop a moment.” 

Ilavelaar said this whilst all the chiefs, bowing low, 
2 irepared to return to their homes. Verbrugge, too, was 
about to take his leave, but returned with the Dj'aksa. 

“ I’ine, L ’ll take some Madeira ; so will Verbrugge. I 
say, Djaksa ! tell me what yon said about Max to tlu^ 
Kliwon ? 

“ Minta awpoiuf (I beg your pardon), iVlr. Assistant 



MAX IIAVKLAA15. 


143 


Itesulent ; I looked at his head, because you had 
spoken. 

“ What the deuce has his head to do with that ? I 
have already forgotten what I said.” 

“ Sir, I said to the Kliwon ” [Tine approached, they 

spoke about little JMax.] 

“ T said to the Kliwon, that tlie Sinjo ” (rortuguo.se, 
Sfiiko, which here means yomuj gentleman, on the same 
jirinciple as Innis a non luccndo) “ was made for a king.” 

Tine was glad to hear that slie thought ,so too ! 

“And the Adhipatti looked at the head of the little one, 
and to he sure ! he too ssiw the oeser-ocsc-mn^ according to 
•Javanese superstition destined to weai‘ a crown.” 

As etiquette did not permit the Djaksa a ]3acc in the 
presence of the liegeiit, he took his leave, and we were 
for some time tog(dher with the Regent witliout speaking 
of anything relative to the “ service.” Rut the Regent 
asked all of a siuUlen, “ if the money uhich was to the 
tax-gatherer’s credit co\d(.l not be paid ?” 

“ Certainly not,” said Verbrugge, “Mr. Adliipatti knows 
that this cannot be done till his responsibility ceases.” 

Havclaar played with Max, but this did not prevent 

' Ueser-oeseran = as the hairs are on the head. It means the place 
where the hairs of an animal meet (also said of the h.air of the head). 
It is rather difficult to explain this peculiar hair vertebra — the oeser- 
oeseran, a peculiar one — a peculiar whirl in the hair. The Djaksa 
saw such a peculiar meeting of hairs on the head of little Max, jjist 
as some peojdc in Europe look at the lines on your right hand. 



MAX HAVKLAAU. 


U4 

him from reading in the Kegeiit’s face that Verbrugge's 
answer displeased him. 

“ Come, Verbrugge, don’t let us be troublesome,” said 
he, and he called for a clerk out of the office. “We will 
pray that his account will certainly be approved.” 

After the Adhipatti had taken his leave, Verbrugge, 
who was a confirmed red-tapeist, remonstrated — 

“ But, Mr. llavelaar, that must not be ! The tax- 

gatherer’s account is under examination at Serang. 

Sui)iiose anything to be wanting?” 

“ Then I will make it good,” llavelaar said. 

Verbrugge did not understand this great consideration 
for the tax-gatherer. 

The clerk soon returned with some pa])ers ; llavelaar 
signed his name, and ordered payment to he hastened. 

“ Verbrugge ! I will tell you why 1 do this. The 
Kegent has not a farthing in the house : his writer told 

me so he himsdf wants this money, and the tax- 

gatherer will advance it to him. T would rather trans 
gress, on my own responsibility, a form, than leave a man 
of his rank and years in perplexity. ISIoreovei', Vei- 
brugge ! people at Lehak abuse their power in a fearful 
way ^}’ou ought to know it : do you know it ?” 

Verbrugge was silent. 

“ I know it !” llavelaar coiitinueil, “ 1 do know it ! 
Did not Mr. Slotering die in November? Well ! the dag 
n/tcr his death, the Eegent forced tlie population to labour 



M-VX HAVELAAK. 


145 


ill his ricc-jields without payment. You might to have 
known it did you know it V' 

Verbrugge did not know it. 

“ You ought to have known it. I know it,” continued 
Ilavelaar. “ There you have the monthly reports of the 
districts,” — and he showed the parcel wliich he had 
received in the Council, — " look, I have opened notliing ; 
there are statements of the number of labourers that have 

worked in the metropolis for the different chiefs. 

Well, are these statements correct ?” 

“ I have not yet seen them ” 

“ Neither have I ; still I ask you if they are correct ? 
Were last month’s statements correct?” 

Verbrugge was silent. 

“ I will tell it you : They were false ! For three times 
the number of labourers had to work for the Regent that 
the orders regulating such matters permit, and they did 
not dare put tliis in the reports Is what I say true?” 

Verbrugge was silent. 

“The reports which I received to-day are likewise 
false,” continued Ilavelaar ; “ the Regent is poor ; the 
Regents of Baudoiig and Tjanjor are members of the 
family of wliich he is the head. He is an Adhipatti, and 
the Regent of Tjanjor is only a Tonunongong, and because 
Lebak is not fit for coffee-culture, and therefore gives him 
no emolument, bis revenues do not allow him to vie in 
magnificence and pomp with a simple Dcmang of the 

K 



146 


MAX IIAVKI.AAR. 


Preangan Eegencies, whose duty it would be to hold 
his nephews’ horses Is that true?” 

“ Yes, it is.” 

“ He has nothing but his siilaiy, and from that a 
deduction is made to pay off an advance wliich the 
Government gave him, when he tio you know ?” 

“ Yes, I do.” 

“ When he desired to build a new mosque, for which 
much money was required. Moreover, niiany members of 
his family do you know ?” 

“ Yes, I do.” 

“ Many members of his family (who do not properly 
belong to Lebak, and are therefore not much esteemed) 
range themselves as a troop of plunderers round him, and 
extort money from him is that true?” 

“ Yes,” said Verbinigge. 

“ And when his puree is empty, which is often tin? 
case, they take, in his name, from the people what they 
like is that so ?” 

“ Yes, it is.” 

“ 1 am also well informed ^but more about that by 

and by. The Regent, u'ho is old, has for some years been 
ruled ly a desire to become meritorious through gifts to 
the priests ; he sijends much money for the travelling 
expenses of pilgrims to Mecca, who bring him back all 
sorts of old relics and talismans Is it not so ? 


“ Yes, that is true.” 



MAX HAVKf.AAU. 


147 


“Well, because of all this he is very poor. Tlie 
Deuiang of Parang-Koodjarig is his son-in-law. Wlicre 
the Kegent himself does not dare to take, out of shame 
for his rank, this Demang does it. But it is not the 
Demang alone — who courts the Eegent hy extorting 
money and goods from the poor population, and Avho 
carries the people away from tlieir own rice-fields, hy 

driving them to the llcgent’s rice-fields ; and he ! 

1 will believe, that he would willingly act otherwise, hut 

necessity compels him to make use of such means 

Is not all this true, Verbrugge ?” 

“Yes, it is true,” said Verbrugge, who perceived more 
and more that Havclaar’s look was sharp. 

“I knew,” said Havelaar, “that he had no money in his 
house. You heard this morning, that it is ray intention 
to do my duty. I will not suffer injustice ; God help me, 
1 will not suffer that !” And he jumped up, and there 
was something in his tone quite difl'crent from that of the 
day before, while taking his official oath. — “ But I will do 
my duty with leniency. I do not care to know too exactly 
wliat has happened. But all that happens henceforth is 
on my responsibility ; / shall, therefore, take care of that. 
1 hup(i to remain here a long time. Do you know, Ver- 
brugge, that our vocation is noble indeed ? But, do you 
know, also, that I ought to have heard from you all that 
1 have just told you? I know you quite well, as well as 
I know who are in revolt on the South coast : yon are a 



148 MAX HAVELAAH. 

good man, I know ; but why did not you toll me of so 
much wrong going on here? You have been for two 
months temporary Assistant Resident, and moreover, yoii 
have been here a long time as Controller ; you ought to 
know it.” 

“ Mr. Ilavelaar, I never served under any one like you ; 
— there’s something very peculiar about you: don’t be 
offended.” 

“ Not at all ; I know very well that I am not as all 
men ^but what docs that matter!” 

“ You communicate to othem conceptions and ideas 
never heard of before.” 

“ No ! they had fallen asleep in that despicable official 
stillness, whose style is : ‘ / have the Jtonoiir to he,’ and its 
feeling ‘ the perfect satisfaction of the Government’ No, 
Verbrugge! do not trouble yourself about it. You need 
not learn anything from me. For instance, this morn- 

ing in tlie Council have I told you anything new ?” 

“ No, no news but you spoke quite differently from 

others.” 

“ Yes, that is, because my education has been neglected. 

T speak at random. But you must tell me why 

you complied witli all the ^YVon^ existing in Lebak ? ” 

“ I never before had such an impression at an initiation 

moreover, all this has always been so in these 

countries.” 


“ Yes, yes ; I know that very well every one cannot 



MAX lIAVKLAAlf, 


U9 


be a proj)liet or an apostle — wood would soon be too dear 
because of the crucifying. Hut certainly you will help 
me to make all right : you undoubtedly like to do your 
duty r 

“ To be sure ! above all with you. But not every one 
would claim, or tax it so very severely, and then one gets 
so easily into the position of a man who fights Avindmills.” 

“ No ! those who love injustice because they live on 
it, say that there was no injustice to have the pleasure 
of railing at you as a Don Quixote, and keep tlicir wind- 
mills turning at the same time. But, Verbruggo ! you 
needed not to wait for mo to do your duty. Mr. Slotering 
was a clover and honest man : he knew what happened ; 
he condemned it and opposed it. Look here !” — Ilavelaar 
took out of a writing-desk two sheets of paper, and show- 
ing tliem to Verbruggo, he asked — 

“ Whose handwriting is this?” 

“ That is the handwriting of Mr. Slotering ” 

“ Exactly so — well ! Here are two rough copies, evi- 
dently containing subjects on which he wislicd to speak 
to the llesident. Look here; — 1. ‘On Bice Culture.’ 
2. ‘ On the Houses of the Village Chiefs.’ 3. ‘ On the 
Gathering of the Land-taxes ! !’ etc. After the last are 

two points of exclamation what did Mr. Slotering 

mean by tliat V 

“ I cannot tell,” said Verbrugge. 

“ 1 can. That means that more taxes arc paid than 



150 


MAX HAVELAAK. 


flow into the exchequer of the country. But I will show 
you something which we both know, because it is written 
in words and not in signs. Look here : — 

“‘ 12 . On the Abuses practised on the Population by 
the Eegents and the Inferior Chiefs. On the keeping of 
different Houses at the Cost of the Population, etc.’ 

“ Is that clear? You sec that Mr. Sloteriiig was certainly 
a man who knew how to take the initiative ; you could 
have sujiported him. Listen : — 

'“15. That many persons of the families and servants 
of tlie inland chiefs ajipear on the payment lists, who 
indeed take no part in the culture ; whereby they have 
advantages to the prejudice of the real participants. 
They also get unlawfully into possession of rice-fields, 

which are only due to those persons who have a 

share in the culture.’ 

“ Here I have another note written in pencil. Look 
here, too, we may read something that is very clear : — 

“ ‘ The emigration of the population at Paraug-Koodjang 
can only be ascribed to the excess of abuses by which the 
people are victimized.’ 

“ What do you say about that ? You see I am not so 
eccentric as I ajjpear to be, when I mean to do what is 
right, and that others shall do the same ! ” 

“ It is true,” said Verbrugge; “Mr. Slotcring often spoke 
to the Resident about all this.” 


“ And what was the consequence ? ” 



MAX IIAVBLAAR. 


151 


“ The Regent was summoned and ho had an inter- 
view with the Resident ” 

“ Exactly so ! and what more ? ’’ 

“ The Regent generally denied all. Then witnesses were 
called for — nobody dared to bear witness against the Re - 
gent. Mr. Havelaar, these things are very difficult ! ” 

Tlie reader, before he has finished the book, will know 
as well as Verbrugge why those things were so difficult. 

“ Mr. Slotoring was much offended about this,” con- 
tinued the Controller ; “ he WTote sharp letters to the 
chiefs ” 

" I read them last night,” said Havelaar. 

“And I often heard him say that, if there were no 
change, and if the Resident would not act with energy, 
he should apply direct to the Governor-General. This he 
also said at the last Council at which he presided.” 

“ Then he would have done wrong, for the Itesident was 
his superior, whom he ought not to pass over, and why 
should he ? It is not, however, to be supposed that the 
Resident of Bantam approves of injustice and arbitrary 
power ?” 

“ Approve no ; but one does not like to accuse a 

liegent ? ” 

“ I do not like to accuse any one, whosoever it may be ; 
but where it must be done, a Regent as well as anybody 
else. But accusing is still out of the question, God be 
] 'raised ! To-morrow I shall visit tlie Regent. I will 



152 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


show him how had it is to abuse one's power— above all, 
where the possessions of poor people are concerned. But 
in expectation that all will be restored, I will help him in 
his critical circumstances as much as I can. You under- 
stand now why I made the tax-gatherer pay that money 
immediately. I likewise intend to beg the Government 
to acquit him of the advance. And to you, Verbrugge, I 
propose that we perform our duty punctually, so long as 
possible with leniency, but if must be so, fearlessly. 
You are an honest man, I know, but you are timid. Say 

henceforward resolutely how matters stand advienne que 

'pourra: throw that vagueness away — and now stay to din- 
ner with us : we have Butch cauliflower — but all is quite 

plain; for I must be very economical Come, Max!" 

And with Max on his shoulder, they entered the inner 
gallery, where Tine waited for them at the table, which, as 
Ilavelaar had said, was very simply provided. Duclari, 
who came to ask Verbrugge if he meant to be home for 
dinner, was likewise invited ; and if you would like some 
variation in my story, you must read the next chapter, 
in which I shall-tell you something of what was said at 
this dinner. 



CHAPTER IX. 

[continuation of stekn’s composition.] 

Reader, I would give anything to know exactly how 
long I could let a heroine float in the air, while / described 
a castle, without exhausting your patience, and causing 
you to look wearily aside, before thd poor creature readied 
the earth ? If niy tale demanded such a cax)er, I should 
X)rudeiitly choose a first storey for my point de depart, and 
a castle of wliich but little could be said. Once for all, 
however, I will make you easy on that head : — Havelaar’s 
house had no storeys at all, and the heroine of my book, — 
the lovely, faithful, an^ruchlosc Tine, a heroine! — never 
jumped out of the window. 

Wlieii I ended the foregoing chapter, with a reference to 
some variation in the next, it was rather a rhetorical arti- 
fice, and to make a good ending, than because I meant 
that the next chapter should only be valuable as a cliange. 

A writer is vain as a man. Slander his mother, or 

ridicule the colour of his hair, say that he has an Amster- 
dam accent, such as no Amsterdammer ever had, — perhaps 



151 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


he will forgive you those things ; but never say anything 

against him as an author for this he will not forgive. 

If you don’t think my book a good one, and you hap- 
pen to meet me, just act as if we were strangers to each 
other. 

No, even such a chapter “ for a change” appears to me, 
through the magnifyiug-glass of my vanity as an author, 
to he most important and indispensable ; and if you do 
not read it, and afterwards feel disappointed with my 
book, I shall not hesitate to tell you that your not read- 
ing it was tlie cause of your inability to aj)preciatc my 
book, for the chapter you omitted was just the most essen- 
tial of all 1 therefore — for I am a man and an author 

— should hold every chapter to be essential which you 
had passed over with unpardonable readerlike levity. 1 
imagine that your wife asks, “ Wliat do you tiiink of tliat 
book?” And you say, for instance — [Imrihilc audit ti 
to me] — with the pomp of diction peculiar to married 
men — 

“ Humph ! so-so. — I don’t know yet.” 

Well then, barbarian ! read on : what is most important 
is about to commence. And with trembling lips 1 look at 

you, and measure the tliickuess of the turned leaves 

and I look on your face for the reflection of that chapter 

“ that is so important.” “ No,” I .say, “ he has not yet 

jumped uj) cmbraceil somebody in ecstasy liis wife 

perhaps ” But you read on. It appears to mo tliat 



MAX IIAVELAAIt. 


ISf) 

he lias already had “the important chapter” ^you have 

not jumped up at all, and have embraced nothing 

And fewer and fewer grow the leaves under your right 
thumb, and my hope for that embrace becomes fainter and 
fainter ; 

“ Yes, truly, I reckoned on a tear !” 

And you have finished the novel to “ where they have 
met each other,” and you say, yawning — [“ that is another 
expression of true eloquence”] — 

“ Not much it is such a book as is often written 

now-a-days ! ” 

But don’t you know, monster, tiger, European reader ! 
don’t you know that you spent an hour in biting my soul as 
a tooth-pick ; in gnawing and chewing the flesh and bone 
of your species ? Man-eater ! my soul was in that which 
you have ruminated on as once eaten grass. ’Ihat was my 
heart that you swallowed there as a dainty bit, for I put my 
heart and my soul into that book : and so many tears fell 
on that manuscript, and my blood w'cnt back from the veins 
to the heart, as I wrote on, and I gave you all this ; and you 
bought this for a few pence — and you say “ Humph !” 

'riie reader understands that I do not speak here about 
my book. 

So that I will only say, that I quote the words of Abra- 
ham Bhmkaart ^ 

^ Olio of tlio cliaractoivs of a l^utoU novel much in vogue some 
fifty years ago. 



" Who is that Abraham Blankaart asked Louise Eose- 
meyer, and Fred told her, which gave me much pleasure ; 
for this gave me an opportunity to get up and make an 
end of the reading — for this evening at least. You know 
that I am a coffee-broker — [No. 37 Laurier Canal] — and 
that I live for my profession ; you will therefore be able 
to judge how little pleased I was with the work of Stern. 

I had hoped it would be aboxit coffee, and he gave us 

yes, Heaven knows what ! He has already had our atten- 
tion during throe parties, and, what is worse, tlio Eose- 
meyers like it. I make a remark, he appeals to Louise. 
Her approbation, he says, is dearer to him than all the 
coffee in the w’oiid, and moreover, when my heart burns, 
etc. — [look at that tirade, page so-and-so, or rather don’t 
look for it at all.] There I am, and don’t know what to 
do ! That parcel of Shawlman’s is a true Trojan horse ; 
even Fred is corrupted by it. He helped Stern, as I per- 
ceive, for “ Abraham Blankaart” is too Dutch for a German. 
Both are so very self-sufficient that I am truly perplexed 
with the matter. Worse still, I made an agreement with 
Gaafzuiger for the publishing of a book about the Coffee- 
Auctions. All Holland is waiting for it, and there Stern 
goes quite another way. Yesterday ho said : “ Be at your 
ease ; diffei’ent roads lead to Eome : wait for the end of 
the introduction ” - [is all this only “introduction?”] — 



MAX HA VELA AH. 


157 


“ I promise you that all will come down to coffee, — coffee, 
coffee, and nothing but coffee.” “ Think of Horace,” he 
continued ; “ has he not said, ‘ Omne tulit punctum qni 

mismit’ Coffee mth something else 1 And do you not 

act in the same way, when you put sugar and milk in your 
cup ?” And then I am forced to he silent ; not because 
he is right, hut because I and the firm Last and Co., have 
to take care that old Mr. Stern does not fall into the 
hands of Eusselinek and Waterman, who woidd serve him 
very badly, because they are bunglers. 

With your permission, reader ! I give vent to my feel- 
ings, and in order that you, after reading what Stern has 
written — [have you really read it?] — should not pour out 
your wratli on an innocent head, — for what man will em- 
ploy a broker who scolds him for a man-eater ? — I take 
it for gmnted that you aie convinced of my innocence. 1 
cannot exclude young Stern from a share in my book, 
now that matters have gone so far. Louise Kosemeyer 
when she comes out of church- -[the boys appear to wait 
for her] — asks if he will come early in the evening to read 
a good deal about iVIax llavelaar and Tine. 

But as you bought or bon’OAved the book trusting in 
the respectable title, which promises something worth 
reading, I acknowledge your claims to something that is 
worth your money, and, therefore, I once more write a 
couple of chapters. Y^ou, reader, do not go to the parties 
of tlu^ liosemeyt'rs ; and theriTore you arc more fortunate 



158 


MAX irAVKLAAli. 


than T am, wlio have to liear all! You are at liberty to 
pass over the chapters that liave a flavour of German 
excitement, ami to read only what has been written by 
me, who am a resi)ectable man and a coffee-broker. 

With surprise I learnt from Stern’s scribbling and Shawl- 
man’s parcel the fact that no coffee is planted in the dis- 
trict of Lebak. That is a great mistake, and I shall con- 
sider my pains largely rewarded, if the Government 
through my book perceives this flxult. 

From Shawlman’s papers it would aixpear that the soil 
in these regions is not fit for coffee -culture ; but that is no 
excuse ; and 1 maintain tliat it is an unpardonable neglect 
of the interests of Holland generally, and of the coffee- 
brokers in particular ; yes, of the davanese, neither to 
make the ground fit for coffee — [the Javanese have 
nothing else to do] — or, if they think this impossible, to 
send the men who, live there to other places where the 
ground is good for coffee. 

I never say anything that I have not well considered, 
and I dare affirm that I here speak with a knowledge 
of business, because I have maturely consithuxHl this 
matter more than once since I heard Gomiue^ Wawe- 
laar’s sermon on the Fast-day^ for the Gon version of the 
Heathen. 

That was on Wednesday evening. You must know that 
I jjunctually fulfil my obligations as a father, and that I 

^ “ Domi lie, ’’—title of Dutch clergymen. 

- Literally, “<lay of prayers.” 



MAX IIAVKLAAIJ. 


150 


take the moral education of my cliildron very much to 
Jicart. As Fred lias dining the last few days assumed 
something in tone and manner which displeases me — 
[that confounded parcel is the cause of it all]— I have 
given him a good lecture, and said, “ Fred, I am not satis- 
fied with you : I always set you a good example, and you 
forsake the right path ; you arc conceited and trouhle- 
some ; you make verses, and you have kissed Betsy Ilose- 
meyer. The fear of the Lord is the source of all wisdom : 
therefore you must not kiss the Rosemeyers, and you must 
not he so conceited. Immorality leads to destruction : read 
the Scriptures, and mark that Shawlman. lie left the 
ways of the Lord : now he is poor, and dwells in a little 
garret ; that is the consequence of immoi-ality and had 
conduct ; he wrote improjicr articles in the ImUpcndancc 
and let the ‘ Aglaja ’ iall : such are the consequences of 
being wise in one’s own eyes, lie docs not now know 
what o’clock it is, and his little hoy wears knee-hreeches. 
Think that your body is a temple of God, and that your 
father has always had to work very hard for his bread — 
[it is the truth], liaise your eyes upwards, and endeavour 
to become a resj)ectable broker wdicn I go to Driebergen.^ 
And consider all those men, who will not listen to good 
couirsel, who trample upon religion and momlity, and see 
yourself in these men. Do not think yourself equal to 
Stern, whose father is so rich, and who W'ill alsvays have 

* Dricbergen, — a village of country-scats ; the mmmum bonum of a 
successful Anistcnlani trader's .-uspiratioiis. 



160 


MAX HAVEI.AAl!. 


money enough, even if he does not like to become a 
broker. Only think that wickedness is always punished ; 
look again at that Shawlman, who has no winter over- 
coat, and who looks like a clown. Pay attention when 
you are at church, and yon must not fidget so much on 
your bench, as if you were annoyed ; and do not wait for 
girls wlien the service is over, for that destroys all chance 
of edification. Do not make Mary laugh when I am 
reading the Bible at breakfast ; all this should not be in a 
respectable household. 

“ You have also drawn caricatures on Bastianus’ desk 
when ho was not at the office on account of the gout, 
which continually plagues him, — this keejis them in the 
office away from their work ; and you may read in the 
Word of God that such follies cud in ruin. Tliis Shawl- 
man did the same when he was young : when a child he 
beat a Greek on the AVester Market; now he is idle, con- 
ceited, and sickly. Do not always make fun with Stern ; 
his father is rich ; and do as if you did not sec it, when 
he makes wiy faces to the bookkeeper, and when he is 
busy with verses outside the office. Tell him that he had 
better write to his father that he likes our Company very 
much, and that he is so contented here, and that Mary 
has embroidered .slippers for liim. Ask him, if he thinks 
that his father will go to Busselinck and AYaterman, and 
tell him that tluy are low fellows. Do you see that you 
will ill this way bring him into the right path ? you owe 



MAX HAVKLAAli. 


IGl 


this to your fellow-creatures, and all that verse-making is 
nonsense. Be just and obedient, Fred, and do not pull 
tlie maid-servant’s dress when she brings tea into the 
office ; and do not make me ashamed that she spills it ; 
and St. Paul says, that a son must never vex his father. 
These twenty years I have frequented the Exchange, and 
I may say, that I am esteemed there at my stall. Tliero- 
fore listen to my exhortations, Fred ; fetch your hat, put 
on your coat, and go with me to the prayer-meeting : that 
will do you all the good in the world.” 

So T have spoken, and I am convinced that T made some 
impre.ssion, above all because Domine AVawclaar had for 
his subject : - The love of God evident in ITis wrath against 
unbelievers.- -(Samuers reproof of Saul : 1 Sam. xv. 33.) 

1 continually thought, while listening to his sermon, 
liow great is the difrerence between human wisdom and 
divine. I have already told you, that in Shawlman’s 
})arcel, there is, amongst much rubbish, a great deal of 
what appeared to be sound common sense ; but of how 
little significance is this, wlien compared with such Ian 
guage as that (d’ Parson Wawelaar. And not from his 
own strength, — for I know Wawelaar, and consider liim to 
1)0 man of middling capacity — his eloquence is given 
him by the power that comes from above. This difter- 
(mce was still more obvious, because he hinted at many 
things, about which Shawl man liimself had written ; for 
y<ju have seen, that in Ins parcel, he speaks much about 

I. 



162 


MAX HAVEL A AK. 


Javanese and other Pagans — [Fred says that the Java- 
nese are no Pagans ; hut I call every one who has a wrong 
faith a Pagan]. From the Domino’s sermon T got my idea 
of the unlawfxd revocation of the coffee-culture at Lebak, 
about which I shall say more by and by ; and because, 
being an honest man, 1 am not willing that the reader 
should receive nothing for his money, I will here com- 
municate some extracts from the sermon, which I consider 
particularly touching. He had proved in a few words 
from the above-named text the love of God, and very soon 
went on to the point in question, viz., the conversion of 
Javanese, Malay, and otlnn- Pagan race.s, whatever may 
be their names. 

“ Such, my beloved ! was the vocation of Israel [lu* 
meant the destruction of the inhabitants of Canaan] — 
“ and such is the vocation of Holland ! No, it shall not 
“ be said that the light which beams upon us has been 
“ put aside under a biLshel, nor that we grudgingly com 
“ municate the bread of life. Glance at tlie islands of the 
“ Indian Ocean, inhaixited by millions and millions of 
“ children of the accursed son — and of the rightly ac 
“ cursed son — of the noble, God-ser\'ing Noah. There 
“ they creep in the disgusting snake-lioles of Pagan igtior- 
“ ance, there they bow the black W’oolly head under tin? 
“ yoke of selfish jmests. There they worship God, invok 
“ ing a false prophet that is an abomination in the eyes 
“ of the Loi'd ; and, beloved ! as if it were not enough to 



MAX IIAVKXAAK. 


163 


“ obey a false prophet, there are even those among them 
“ who worship anotlier God, or rather other gods; yes, 

“ gods of wood and stone, which they themselves have 
“ made in their own imago — black, abominable, with flat 
“ noses, and devilish. Yes, beloved ! tears almost arrest 
“ me ; for deeper still is the depravity of the race of Ham. 

“ There are amongst them, that know no God under any 
“ name whatever ; who think it sufficient to obey the laws 
“ of soci('ty ; who consider a harv'est-song, wherein they 
" express their joy on the success of their labour, as a 
“ sufficient thanksgiving to the Siijireme Being who mad(‘ 

“ the harvest ripen. 

“ There are ignorant men, my beloved, who think that 
“ it is suflicient to love wife and child, and not to take 
“ from their fellow-beings w’hat does not belong to them, 
“ and that they may then calmly lay down their heads 
“ and sleep ! Do you not shiver with hon'or at this 
“ picturi! % does not your heart shrink when you think of 
“ what will be tlie fate of all those fools as soon as the 
“• trumpet shall sound which will summon the dead and 
“ separate the faithful from the unfaithful? Do you not 
“ hear? Yes, you do hear; for from the text you have 
“ perceived that your CJod is a mighty God, and a God 
“ who will inflict vengeance- yes, you hear the breaking 
“ bones, and the crackling of the flames in the etenial 
“ Gehenna, where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth : 
“ — there, there they burn and perish not, for the punish- 



164 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


“ merit is etenial : — there the flame licks with a nevei’- 
“ satisfied tongue the screaming victims of unbelief : — 
“ there the worm dies not that gnaws their hearts through 
“ and through without destroying them, that there may 
“ always remain a heart to gnaw in the breast of the 
“ God-forsaken. I^ook how they strip off the black skin 
" of that unbaptized child, that, scarcely born, was slung 
“ away from the breast of its mother into the abyss of 

“ eternal damnation 

[Now, at this moment a woman fainted away.] 

“ But, beloved,” continued Domino W., “ God is a God 
“ of love. It is not His will that the sinner should 
“ perish, but that he .should be saved by His mercy in 
“ Christ, through faith ! And therefore Holland has been 
“ selected to save as many as can be saved of these miser- 
“ able creatures. Therefore He has given power to a 
“ country small in extent, but great and strong by the 
“ knowledge of God, — power over the. inhabitants of those 
“ regions, that they may be saved from the torments of hell 
“ by the holy, never sufficiently to be praised Gospel. The 
“ .ships of Holland navigate the great waters, and bring 
“ civilisation, religion, Christianity, to the erring Javanese. 
“ our haj)py Holland does not de.sire salvation for 
“ itself alone ; — we wish to communicate it to the unfor 
“ tunate creatures on far-off .strands, that thei’e lie hound 

* Domine Wawelaar and the Holy Willie of the Scottish poet Burns 
appear to have heen brought up in the same school of theology. 



MAX IIAVKLAAK. 


165 


“ in the fetters of unbelief, superstition, and immorality, 
“ — and the contemplation of the duties that rest on us 
“ shall be the seventh head of my sermon.” For what 
preceded was the sixth. 

Amongst the obligations which we have to fulfil re- 
specting these poor Pagans were named — 

“ 1. The giving of large sums in money to the Missionary 
“ Societies. 

“ 2. The support of the Bible Societies, in order that they 
“ may he able to distribute Bibles in Java. 

“ 3, The erection of ‘ idaccs for religious purposes at 
“ Harderwijk’ for the use of the colonial recruiting depdt. 

“ 4. The writing of sermons and religious songs proper to be 
“ read and sung to the Javanese by the soldiers and sailors. 

'• 5. The formation of an association of influential men, 
“ whose duty it woidd he to supplicate our most iven-thy 
“ King 

“ {a.) Only to aivpoint such governors, oflieers, and 
“ employes as can be regarded as steadfast in the true 
“ religion. 

“ (i.) To allow the Javanese to visit the barracks, 
“ the ships of war, and merchantmen, that by intcr- 
“ course with Dutch soldiers and sailors they may be 
“ instructed in the kingdom of God. 

“ (c:.) 'To prohibit the acceptance of Bibles or reli- 
" gious treatises as payment in public-houses. 

“ (</.) To stipulate in the conditions of the opium 



166 


MAX HAVELAAK. 


“ license^ in Java, that in every opium-house a number 
“ of Bibles must he provided, in proportion to the ap- 
“ parent number of visitors of such a place ; and that 
“ the farmer binds himself not to sell any opium, unless 
“ the buyer takes a religious treatise at the same time. 

“ (e.) To order that the Javanese he by labour 
" educated to the kingdom of God. 

“ 6. Tlee giving of large sums of money to the Missionary 
“ Societies.” 

I know that T have given the last statement under 
No. 1 ; hut he reiicated it, and such a superfluity seems to 
me to be very explicabhj in the entlmsiasm of discoui-se. 

But, reader, did you pay attention to No. 5 (e.) ? Now 
then; that was what put me so muoli in Jiiind of tlie 
Coffee-Auctions and the pretended sterility of the soil of 
Lebak, that you will mjt be siuprised, on my assuring 
you, that tliis matter has not been for a moment out of 
my thoughts since Wednesday evening. Domine W. read 
the repoits of the missionaries; nobody can ilispute his 
thorough know’ledge of the business. Well then, — when 
he, witJi these reports in his liands, ami his eyes turned 
to God, asserts that much labour will be favourable to 
the conquest of Javane.se souls to the kingdom of (!od, 
then I may ccutainly assume that I am nut so far from 
the truth, when 1 say tliat Lebak will do very well for 
coffee-culture ; and more still, that tlu^ 8u])reme Being 

' The trade is a monojioly of the Dutch tlovcrnmcnt! ! 



MAX IIAVELAAK. 


IG7 


perhaps made the ground unfit for coffee-culture, oidy in 
order tliat by the labour tliat is necessary to construct 
another soil there, the population of that province may 
be made fit for salvation. 

I do hope that my book will fall under the King’s eye, 
and that it may be very soon apparent in enlarged Auc- 
tions, how strong a relation there is between the knowledge 
of God ami tlie well-known interest of all citizens. Look 
liow the simple, humble Wawelaar, without wisdom of 
men — [tlie fellow never set foot in the Exchange] — but 
enlightened by the Gospel, which is a lamp to his path, 
suddenly gives me, a coffee-broker, a hiiit which is not 
only important to all llollaiid, but wliereby I ma}' be able 
to go perha])s five years carli(;v to Driebergen, if Fred 
behaves well — [lie was very quiet during the sermon]. 
Ves, labour, labour, that is my maxim ; labour for the 
Javanese, that is my principle, and my principles are 
sacred to me. 

Is not the (iospel tlie boiiutn ! Is there any- 

thing bi'tter than salvation ? Is it not, therefore, our duty 
to make sure the .salvation of these men i Ami when 

labour is neci'ssary for that 1 myself have frequented 

the ICxchange for twenty years can we then refuse 

labour to the .Javanese, when it is necessary for his sonl, 
in order that it may not hi? tormented hereafter ? Selfish- 
ness ! it would be abominable .selfishness if we did not 
I'luploy all possible efforts to save those poor ening men 



168 


MAX HAVELAAK. 


from the terrible future which Domini Wawelaar so 
eloquently described. A lady fainted when he spoke 
of that black cliild ; perhaps she has a little boy of dark 
features such are women ! 

And should not I insist upon labour, — I, who think 
from morning till evening only about business ? Is not 
even that book, wliich Stern makes me dislike so much, 
a proof how good my intentions are for the welfare of the 
country, and how I like to sacrifice all for that? And 
when I have to labour so hard, /who was baptized (in 
the Amstel Kirk), is it not lawful to exact of the Java- 
nese, who has still to (jarn his salvation, that he should 
employ his hands ? 

When that Society - [I mean Xo. 5 (r.)] is formed, I 

will join it, and endeavour to engage the Kosemeyers to 
join it too, because the sugar-refiners have also an interest 
in it, though I do not beli»!ve that they are very particular 
in their ideas, — I mean the lto.semeyer.s, for they have 
a Eoma# Catholic .servant. In any case, 1 shall do my 
duty. That I promised myself while returning home with 
Fred from the prayer-meeting. In //>// house the Lord 
shall be ser\’cd, I will take care of that; and with the 
more zeal, the more I perceive how wisely all has bcicn 
settled, how good the ways are by which we are con- 
ducted to the hand of flod, how He wills to preserve us 

for eternal and temporal life for that ground at Lebak 

can be very well fitted for eolfee culture. 



CHAPTER X. 

Though I spare nobody where principles are concerned, 
yet I have come to the conclusion that I must act other- 
wise with Stern than with Fred ; and as I foresee that my 
name — [the firm is Last and Co., but my name is Dry- 
stubble — Batavus Drysttibble] — will be connected wdth a 
book, wlierein matters appear that are not in harmony 
with the respect whicli every honourable man and broker 
owes to himself, I conceive it to be my duty to communi 
cate to you how 1 have endeavoured to bring this young 
man Stern back to the true ^KXth. 

I did not si)eak to him of the Lord, becaus(?he is a 
Imtheran ; but i worked on his mind and his honour. 
See how' 1 did this, and observe how useful a knowledge 
of mankind is. 1 heard him si\}\ auf Uhmiworf,'' and 
asked him what he meant by that? 

“ Well,’’ he said, “ that 1 ]»ledge my honour for the 
trulh of what I say.” 

“ That is much,” I said. “ Are you so sure of speak 
iiig the truth 



170 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


'' Yes,” he replied, “ 1 always speak the truth. When 
uiy breast glows * * * ” The reader knows the rest. 

That is indeed very noble,” said T, and I made as if 1 
believed it. 

But this was a part of the trap that I liad prepared for 
liim, to show the young fellow his right place, and to 
make him understand how great is the distance between 
a mere beginner — though his father may have a large 
business — and a broker who has frequented the Exchange 
for twenty years, but 1 said it in a manner not to run the 
risk of seeing old Mr. Stern fall into the hands of Bussel- 
inck and Waterman. I was acquainted with the fact 
that he knows all sorts of verses by lieart ; and as verses 
always contain lies, I was quite sure that I should very 
soon catch him telling lies. It was not long before 1 did, 
I sat in the back parlour, and he was in the siiUc ^ — for 
we have a suite ; ^lary was occupied with knitting, and 
he was going to tell her .something. I listened very 
attentively, and when lie had tinished 1 asked him if he 
possessed the book containing the story which he had just 
narrated. He said Yes, and gave it me; it was a volume 
of one of the works of a certain fellow called Heine. 

The following morning I handed to him — Stern, I mean 
— the following 

’ Suite is ail Aiiistenlaiiiisiii, and ineaiis a front room divi<lcd from 
a hack parlour hy folding-iloor.s : to possess such a “suite” is coii- 
siilered in Amsterdam as the ae plus ultra of re.spectahility. 



MAX HAVELAAK. 


171 


“ Contemplations on the love of ti’uth of one who recites 
“ the following nonsense of Heine to a young girl 
“ occupied in knitting in the drawing-room — 

‘ Auf Fliigelu des Gesanges, 

Herzliebchcn, trag’ ich dich fort.’^ 

“ Ifcrzliehchen ? Maiy your sweetheart ? Do your 

parents and Lotxise Itosemcyer know that ? Is it proper 
to say that to a child, who might, on account of it, very 
readily become disobedient to her mothei’, by thinking 
herself of age, because she is called herzlicbclien. What 
is the meaning of that ‘ carrying away on your wings V 
You have no wings, nor has your song. Try to fly over 
the Laxirier Canal ; it is not very wide. But if you had 
wings, could you propose such a thing to a girl who 
is not yet confirmed ? what do you mean by that flying 
away together ? For shame ! 

‘ Fort nacli den Fluren des Ganges 
Ua weisz ich den schbnsten Ort.’^ « 

“ Then you may go there alone, and hire loilgiiigs, but 
don’t take with you a girl Avho has to hel]) her mother 
at home. But you do not mean it ; for you never saw 
the Canges, and you cannot therefore know whether you 
will be comfortabh! there. Shall I tell you how matters 

' “Oil song’s exulting pinion 

I ’ll hear thee, my sweetheart fair.” 

- “ Where (ianges holds his dominion, — 

'riic sweetest of spots know I there.’’ 



172 


MAX HAVELAAU. 


“ stand ? You tell nothing but lies only, because you 
“ make yourself in the verses a slave of , cadence and 
“ rhyme. If the first line liad ended in c«7ce, you would 
“ have asked Mary whether she would go with you to a 
“ InJce, and so on. You see, therefore, that your proposed 
“ voyage was not meant, and that all depends on a tinkling 
“ of words without sense. What if Mary should indeed 
“ like to undertake this journey ? I do not speak now of 
“ the uncomfortable mode of conveyance which you pro- 
“ pose ; but she is, God be praised, too intelligent to long 
“ for a country of which you say : — 

‘ Da liogt cin rothbliihender Garten 
Im stillen Mondenscliein ; 

. Die Lotosblumen erwarten 
Ihr trautes Schwesterlein ; 

‘ Die Veilchen kichern und kosen ; 

Und scliau’ii nach den Sternen empor ; 

Heimlich erzahlen die Rosen 
Sich diiftende Marclien in’s Ohr ! ’ ‘ 

“ Wliat do you intend to do with Mary in that garden 
“ ill the moonshine ? Is that moral, is that proper, is that 

* “ There a red blooming garden is lying 
In the moonlight silent and clear ; 

The lotos-llowers are sighing 

For their sister so pretty and dear. 

“ The violets prattle and titter, 

And gaze on the stars high above ; 

The roses mysteriously twitter 
Their fragrant stories of love.” 



MAX HAVELAAIl. 


173 


“ respectable, Stern ? Would you disgrace me to the level 
“ of Busseliiick and Waterman, with whom no respectable 
commercial firm will have any dealings, because of the 
“ elopement of their daughter, and because they are 
" bunglers. What should I have to say, when they 
“ asked me on the Exchange why my daughter remained 
“ so long in that garden ? Eor, you understand, — I hope 
“ that nobody would believe me if I said that she had to 
“ look after those lotos flowers, which, as you say, have 
“ been long waiting for lier. And every intelligent man, 
“ too, would laugh at me if I was foolish enough to say, 
“ ‘Mary is there in that red garden— [wliy red, and not 
“ yellow or puiplo?]— to listen to the tattle and laughing 
“ of the violets, or to the tales whieh the roses tell each 
“ other in a clandestine manner.’ Even though this might 
‘‘ be the trutli, of what use would it be to Mary if all 
“ happened so clandestinely that she did not understand a 
“ word ? But it ’s all lies, insipid lies, and ugly they are 
“ at the same time ; for take a ])encil and di-aw a rose 
“ with an ear, and see how that looks. And what do you 
“ mean by Scaying, that those tales have a nice perfume ? 
“ Shall I tell you what it means in plain Dutch ? That 
“ means, that you can smell the lie so it is ! 

‘ Da hiipfen herboi und lau-schen 
Die frommen, khigen Gazellen ; 

Und in der Feme raiischen 
Dos heiligen Stvomes W('llen, 



174 


MAX HAVELAAK. 


‘ Da wollen wir niedersinkoii 
Unter den Palmenbanm 
Und Ruhe und Liebe trinken 
Und traumen seligen Traiim/^ 

Cannot you go to the Zoological Gardens, if you wish 
to see foreign animals ? Must those animals be on the 
“ Ganges, which you never observe so well in the wilder- 
'' ness as in a nice enclosure of iron ? Why are those 
“ animals pious and clever ? I will not speak of the latter 
word (it serves to make foolish verses rhyme), but pious? 
AVliat is the meaning of that ? Is not this an abuse of a 
“ holy word tliat should only be used of men Avlio liold the 
“ true faith ? And then that holy stream ? These stories 
“ you tell to Mary might make her a Pagan, might make 
her faith waver as to the existence of any otlxer holy 
water than that of baptism, and any holier river than 
“ the Jordan, Is not that an undermining of morality, 
'' virtue, religion, Christianity, and respectability ? 

''Think about all this. Stern! Your father is the head 
" of a respectable firm, and I am quite sure tliat he 

^ “ The gazelles so gentle (pious) and clever 
Skip lightly in frolicsome mood ; 

And in the distance roars ever 
The holy river’s loud Hood. 

“ And there, while joyously sinking 
Beneath the palm by the stream. 

And love and repose while drinking, 

Of blissful visions we’ll dream.” 

— From Bowring’s /Mwe’s Poims, Loud. 186 (>. 



MAX HAVELAAK. 


175 


“ approves of niy speaking tlius iu a straightforward way, 
“ and that he likes to do business with a person who de 
“ fends virtue and religion. Yes, principles are sacred to 
“ me, and I do not scruple to say plainly what I mean : 
“ therefore, make no secret of what T say ; you m.ay write 
“ to your father that yo\i are here in a respectable family, 
“ that shows you the right pjith, and ask yourself what 
“ would have become of you if you had gone to Bussel- 
“ inck and Waterman 1 There you w’ould likewise hav(' 
“ recited such verses, and nobody would have told you the 
“ folly of it, because they are bunglei's. You may write 
“ this to your father, for when ])rinciples are concerned T 
“ fear nobody. There the girls would perhaps have gone 
*' with you to the Ganges, and then you would perhaps by 
“ this time be lying under that tree on the grass; whereas, 
“ because I warned you, you remain with us in a re- 
“ spectable house. You may write all this to your father, 
“ and tell him that yo\i arc so grateful, that you came 
“ with us, aiul that I take such good care of you, and that 
“ the daughter of Busselinck and AVaterman ran away ; 
“ make him my compliments, and say that I intend to 
“ drop ppi’ cent, of the brokerage, because I cannot 
“ suffer those low fellows, who steal the broad out of the 
“ mouth of a rivial in trade by more tavourable conditions. 

“ And be so kind as to give us something more sub- 
“ stantial in your readings at the Kosemeyers’. T have 
“ seen in Shawlman’s parcel statements of the coffee- 



176 


MAX HAVELAAK. 


'' culture of the last twenty years, in all the Kesidencies 
in Java : read us something of that. And you must not 
scold the girls and all of us, by saying that we are can- 
“ nibals, who have swallowed a part of you; that is not 
respectable, my boy ; believe one who knows what goes 
“ on in the world. I served your father before his birth 
'' — [I mean the firm, Last and Co., formerly it was Last 
“ and Meyer] — you understand, therefore, that T speak for 
'' your good. And incite Fred to behave himself better, 
and do not teach him to make verses ; and make as if 
you did not see it when he makes wry faces at tlie 
“ bookkeeper, and suchlike things. Sliow him a good 
“ example, because you are much older, and try to im- 
press him with steadiness and gravity, because he must 
“ become a broker. 

'' I am your fatherly friend, 

'' Batavus Drystubble, 

{Finn L.>vst & Co., Coffee- Brokers, 

Xo. 37 Laiirin' 



CHAPTER Xr. 

[continuation of stern’s composition.] 

♦ :f« sir * 3|e 

So that I will only say, to speak with Abraham Blan- 
kaart, that I consider this chapter to bo essential,*' be- 
cause it makes you, in my opinion, better acquainted with 
Havelaar, and he seems to be tlie hero of the history. 

Tine, what sort of Kctimon (gherkin, cucumber) is this ? 
Never, my dear, give such sour things with fruits ; cucum- 
bers with salt, piiie-apx3les with, salt, all that comes from 
the ground with salt. Vinegar \vith fish and meat . . . 
there is something about it in Liebig . . . 

‘‘ Dear Max," Tine said, laughing, “ how long have we 
been here ? That Ketimon is from Madam Slotering." 

And it seemed difficult for Havelaar to remember that 
he had arrived only the day before ; and that Tine, with 
the best intentions, had not yet been able to regulate 
anything in kitchen or household. He had already been 
a long time at Kankas-Betong ! Had not he spent the 
whole night in reading the archives, and had not too 
many things already passed through his soul in con- 


M 



178 


MAX IIAVELAAR. 


nexion with Lebak, for him to know so soon that he 
only arrived there the day before ? Tine knew this very 
well ; she always understood. 

“ Oh yes, that is true,'' said he ; '' but still you may like 
to read something from Liebig. Verbrugge, have you read 
much of Liebig ? ” 

“ Who was he ? " asked Verbrugge. 

An author wlio wrote much on the preserving of 
gherkins; he also discovered how to change grass into 
wool .... You understand ? " 

No," said Verbrugge and Duclari together. 

''Well, it had been known for a long time: — send a 
slieep into the field, and you will see. Lut it was Liebig 
who discovered the manner in wliich it happens. Others, 
however, say that he knows but little about it : they are 
now trying to discover the means of dispensing with tlie 
sheep altogether .... Oh, those scholars ! ]\Ioli6re knew 
it very well .... I like Moli^re. If you like, we shall 
have reading every evening; Tine will also l)e of the 
party when iMax is in bod." 

Duclari and Verbrugge liked tliis. Havelaar said that 
he had not many books, but amongst tliem he had Schiller, 
Goethe, H(3ine, Lamartine, Tliiers, Say, IMalthus, Scialoja, 
Smith, Sliakespeare, Byron, Vondel .... 

Verbrugge said that lie was not acquainted with the 
English language. 

" What the deuce ! You are more than thirty years of 



MA.X IIAVELAAR. 


179 


age: what have you been about all this time? But it 
must have been very disagreeable for you at Padang, 
where English is so much spoken. Did you know Miss 
Matta-api (Fire-eye) ? ” 

“ No, I do not know the name.” 

“ It was not her name ; we gave her this nickname 
because her ej'cs were so brilliant. I think she must he 
married by this time ; it was long ago. I never saw such 
eyes .... except at Arles .... you must go there. 
That is the imetticst place I ever visited in my travels. 
It seems to me that there is nothing that so well repre- 
sents beauty in the abstract, .as — a bcautifid woman — a 

visible image of true immaterial purity Believe me, go 

to Arles and Nimes . . . .” 

Duclari, Verbrugge, and Tine also, I must confess, could 
not suppress a loiid laugh at the thought of stopping over 
so unexpectedly from the west of Java to Arles or Nimes. 
Havelaar, who, perhaps, had stood on the tower^ built by 

^ As Arles is renowned for its beautiful remains of Roman origin, 
the tower in question is probably also of Roman construction. True, 
the Saracens coinpicred tliis city in 7.‘10, yet soon afterwards they were 
beaten by Charles Martel, who took the city again. We are strength- 
ened ill our supposition by the communication of M. Do Cauinoiit, 
the celebrated French arclueologist, that the Roman monuments are 
known by the French jieasants of the different departementa under the 
name of Sarrazbi, Even M. Leroy do la Briiire says that the work- 
men call the Roman coins puices de Mahomet, — See Annates de la So- 
cl6f(} Frau^a'ise d'arMologie pour la description, et la conservation des 
monuments, 18G5 (Congres Archeologique de France, XXXI. session d 
Fordenoy 1864) pag. 6 F. — Tiian.^^lator. 



180 


MAX HAVELAAE. 


the Saracens, near the old lioman amphitheatre at Arles, 
had some difficulty in understanding the cause of this 
augh, and then he continued ; — 

“ Well, yes, I mean, when you are in that neighbour- 
hood. I never saw such a thing. I was accustomed to 
disappointments on seeing things that are generally so 
loudly extolled. For instance ! look at the cataracts we 
hear so much of; — I felt little or nothing at Toudano, 
Abaro.s, Schaffhausen, and Niagara. One requires to look 
at his hand-book to know the exact measure of his admi- 
ration of the ‘ so many feet of fall,’ and ‘ so many cubic 
feet of water in a minute,’ and when the figures are high, 
he says, ‘ AVhat !’ I won’t go to see any more cataracts, 
at least not when I have to make a ddtour to get at them. 
They do not tell me anything. Buildings speak louder to 
me, above all when they are pages out of history ; but the 
feeling which these inspire is quite different ; bringing up 
the past, and making its shadows pass in review before us. 
Amongst them are abominable ones, and therefore, how- 
ever interesting they may be, one does not alway'S find in 
them what satisfies icsthetical tastes. And without refer- 
ence to history', there is much beauty in some buildings ; 
but this beauty is again corrupted by guides --cither in 
print, or of flesh and blood — who steal away' your impres- 
sion by their monotonous babble. ‘ This chapel was erected 
by the Bishop of Munster in 1423 ; the pillars are sixty- 
three feet high, and are supported by . . . .’ I don’t 



MAX HAVELAAU. 


181 


know what. This is tiresome; for one feels it necessary to 
have exactly sixty-three feet of admiration at hand not to 
bo taken for a Turk or a bagman. You will tell me now, 
perhaps, that you keep your guide, when a printed one, in 
your pocket, and in the other case, order him to hold his 
tongue, or stand outside; but sometimes to arrive at a 
correct judgment, information is wanted; yet even if that 
could be dispensed with, we might seek in vain in some 
building or other for anything to gratify for more than a 
moment our passion for the beautiful, because there is 
nothing to move, us. This also holds good, in my ojiinion, 
of sculpture and paintings. Nature is motion. Growth, 
hunger, thought, feeling, all these are examples of mo- 
tion .... Stagnancy is death. Without motion there is 
no grief, no enjoyment, no emotion. Sit there motionless 
for a while, and you will see how soon you will make a 
ghostly imprescion on every one else, and even on your 
own imagination. At a tahlenvx vivants, one soon wants a 
new figure, however impressive the sight may have been 
at the commencement. As our taste for beauty is not 
satisfied with one look at anything beautiful, but needs a 
good many successive looks to watch the motion of ikr 
beautiful, we are dissatisfied when contemplating works of 
art, and therefore I assert that a beautiful woman, pro- 
vided her beauty is not too still, comes nearest to the 
ideal of the divinity. 

“ How great is the necessity for motion that 1 speak of, 



182 


MAX HAVELAAE. 


you can partly realize from the loathing which a dancer 
causes you, even if an Elssler or a Taglioni, when she 
having just finished a dance, stands on her left foot, and 
grins at the public.” 

“ That is beside the question,” Verbrugge said ; “ for it 
is absolutely ugly.” 

“ That is jiist my opinion; but she fancies it beautiful, 
and as a climax to all the previous performance, in which 
much beauty may have been displayed. She regards it 
as the point of the epigram, as the ‘auxarmcs!’ of the 
Marseillaise which she sang with her feet ; or as the 
murmuring of the willows on the grave of the love 
repu’cscnted in the dance. And that spectators, who 
generally, like us, found their taste more or less on 
custom and imitation, think that moment to be the 
most striking is evident, because just then every one 
explodes in applause, as if they said, ' All the former 
was beautiful, but now we cannot refrain from giving 
vent to our feelings of admiration.’ You .said that these 
pauses were absolutely ugly, so do I ; but what is the 
reason ? It is because motion was at an end, and with 
that the history which the dancer told. Believe me, stag- 
nation is deatli.” 

“But,” interrupted Duclari, “you also rejected as an 
exponent of beauty, the cataracts . . . yet they move . . .” 

“Yes, but without a history. They move; but do not 
change their place. They move like a rocking-horse. 



MAX IIAVELAAR. 


183 


minits the ‘to and fro.’ They make a noise, but don’t 
speak . . . They cry ‘rroo . . . ri'oo . . . rvoo!’ . . . Try 
crying ‘ rroo, rroo ’ . . . for six thousand years, or more, 
and you will see how few j)ersons will think you an 
amusing man.” 

“ I shall not try it,” said Duclari ; “ but still I do not 
agree with you, that this motion is so strictly necessary. 
I give up the cataracts ; — but a good picture can express 
much, I should think.” 

“ To be sure, but only for a moment. I will try to ex- 
plain my meaning by an example. This is the 8th of 
February . . .” 

“ Certainly not,” said Verbrugge, “ we are still in 
January . . .” 

“No, no; it is the 8th of February 1587, and you are 
shut up in tlio Castle of Fotheringay.” 

“ I V’ asked Duclari, wlio tliouglit that he had not quite 
understood the remark. 

“ Yes, you. You are weary, and try to get some varia- 
tion. There in that wall is a hole it is too high for you 
to look through, but still that is w’hat you desire to do. 
You place your table under it, and upon this table a three- 
legged stool, one of the legs being decidedly weak. You 
have seen at a fair an acrobat, who piled seven chairs one 
above another, and then placed himself on the top with 
his head downwards. Self-love and weariness press you 
to do something of the kind. You climb on your chair. 



184 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


and reach the object. . . . You look for one moment 
through the hole. . . . ‘ Oh, dear !’ You fall. . . . And 
don’t you now know why ?” 

" I think that the weak leg of the stool broke down,” 
said Verbruggc. 

“ Yes ; that leg broke down, — but that is not the reason 
why you fell, the leg broke after your fall. Before every 
other hole, you could have stood a year on that chair, but 
now you would have fallen even if there had been thirteen 
legs to the stool. Yes, even had you been standing on 
the ground. ...” 

“ I take it for granted, ” said Dnclari. “ I see that 
you intend to let me fall, co4U qne ccnUe. I lie flat 
enough now, and at full length ; but really 1 don’t know 
why.” 

“ "Well ; that is very simple . . . you saw there a woman, 
dressed in black, kneeling down before a block. She. 
bowed her head, and white as silver was the neck, which 
appeared whiter from its contrast with the velvet . . . and 
there stood a man with a large sword and he held it high, 
and he looked at this white neck . . . aud he considered 
the arc which his blade must describe, to be driven through 
just iJm’e . . . there between those joints with (jxactness 

and force and then you fell, Duclari ; you fell because 

you saw that, and, therefore, you cried : ‘ Oh, denr !’ and 
not because your chair liad only three legs. 


^ Headsman’s axe. 



MAX HAVELAAR. 


186 


“ And long after you have been delivered from Fother- 
ingay through the intercession of your cousin, or because 
they have grown tired of feeding you there any longer 
like a canary, long afterwards, yes, even now, your day- 
dreams are of this woman ; you are roused from sleep, and 
fall down with a heavy shock on your bed, because you 
want to arrest the arm of the executioner! ... Is it 
not so V’ 

“ I am willing to believe it, but I cannot say very 
decidedly, because I have never looked through a hole in 
the wall of Fotheringay.” 

“ Granted ! nor have /. But now I take a picture, 
which represents the decapitation of Mary Stuart. Sup- 
pose the represeutati(jn to be perfect : there it hangs in a 
gilt frame, suspended by a red cord, if you like ... I 
know Avhat you are about to say, — ‘ Granted !' No 1 you 
do not see the frame ; you even forget that you left your 
walking-stick at the entrance of the picture-galleiy ; you 
forget your name, your child, the new' model shako, not to 
see a picture, but to behold in reality Maiy Stuart, exactly 
the same as at Fotheringay. The executioner stands 
there exactly the same as he must have been standing in 
reality; yes, I will even suppose that you extend your 
arm to avert the blow, that you even cry, 'Let this woman 
live, perhaps she will amend.’ . . . You sec, I give you fair 
play as regards the execution of the picture.” 

“ Yes, but what more ? Is the impression then not 



186 


MAX HAVELAAK. 


exactly the same as when I saw the same in reality at 
Fotheringay ?” 

" No, not in the least, because you did not climb on a 
chair with three legs. This time you take a chair, — with 
four legs, by preference an easy-chair, — ^)'ou go and sit 
down before the picture, in order to enjoy it completely 
and for a long time — [We do enjoy ourselves in seeing 
anything dismal !] — and what is the impression which it 
makes on you?” 

“ Well, dread, anguish, pity, trouble ! . . . just the same 
as when I looked through the hole in the wall. You 
supposed the picture to be perfect, so I must have the 
same impression from it as from the reality.” 

“ No, within two minutes you feel pain in your right arm 
out of sympathy with the executioner, who has to hold up 
so long that blade of steel . . .” 

“ Sympathy with the excc^dioner V’ 

“ Yes ; an equal sense ofq>ain and discomfort .... and 
also with the woman who sits there so long in an uncom- 
fortable position, and probably in an uncomfortable state 
of mind, before the block. You still sympathize with her; 
but this time not because she had to wait so long before 

being decapitated and if you had anything to say or to 

cry, — suppose that you felt disposed to trouble yourself 
with the matter, — it would be nothing else than, ‘ Give 
the blow, man, she is waiting for it !’ And if afterwards 
you look again at that picture, and look often at it, is 



MAX IIAVELAAE. 


187 


your first impression that it is not yet done ? ‘ Is he still 

standing and she lying ?’” 

“ But what motion is there then in the beauty of the 
women at Arles ?” asked Verbrugge. 

“ Oh, that is quite dificrent ! In their features you 
may read a whole history.^ Carthage flourishes, and 
builds ships : you hear Hannibal’s oath against liomo 
. . , here they twist cords for their bows .... there the 
city burns . . .” 

“ Max ! Max ! I believe that you left yorir heart at 
Arles,” said Tine. 

“Yes, for a moment .... but I have got it back 
again : you shall hear it. Observe, I do not say I saw a' 
woman there who was in tliis or that respect beautiful 
— no, they were all beautiful, and so it was impossible 
there to fall in love, because the next person always drove 
the preceding from your adTuiration, and really I thought 
of Caligula or Tiberius, — of which of them do they tell 
the story ? — who wished that all humankind had but one 
head .... now therefore involuntarily I wished that the 
women of Arles . . . .” 

“ Had but one head together ?” 

“ Yes.” 

" To knock it off?” 

“ Certainly not . . . but to kiss it, I was going to say ; 


' This appears to refer to the confident looks of the Carthaginians, 
who knew their own strength. 



188 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


it is not that . . . No, to look at it, to dream of it, and 
to . . . be good !” 

Duclari and Verbrugge certainly thought this con- 
clusion very strange. 

But Max did not notice it, and continued : — 

“ For so noble were the features that one felt somewhat 
ashamed to be only a man, and not a spark .... a beam 

.... no, that would be substance .... a thought 

But suddenly a brother or a father sat dow’n beside 

these women, .... goodness ! I saw one blow her 
nose !” 

“ I knew that you would draw a black stripe across it,” 
said Tine. 

" Is that my fault ? I would rather have seen her fall 
down dead ; 

“ Ought such a girl so far to forget herself?” 

“ But, ^li’. Havelaar,” asked Verbrugge, “ suppose she 
had a bad cold ? ” 

“Well, .she ought not to have a l)ad cold with such a 
nose ” 

As if an evil .spirit spoke. Tine suddenly sneezed . . . 
and before she thought of it, she had blown her nose ! 

“Dear Max! don’t be angry!” said .she, with a sup- 
pressed laugh. 

He did not n^ply ; and however foolish it seems, or is, 
— yes, he was angry. And what sounds strange too. Tine 
was glad that he was angry, and that he required her to 



MAX HAVELAAB. 


189 


be more than the women of Arles, even though she had 
no reason to be proud of her nose. 

If Duclari still thought Havelaar a fool, one could not 
be surprised if he felt himself strengthened in this 
opinion, on perceiving the short anger that could be read 
in Havelaar’s face, after that nose-blowing. But he had 
returned from Carthage, and he read on the faces of his 
guests, with the rapidity with which he cmdd read, when 
his mind was not too far away from home, that they had 
made the two following theoi’cms ; — 

“ 1. Whoever will not let his wife blow her nose is a fool. 
“ 2. Whoever thinks that a beautiful nose may not be 
blown, is wrong to apply that idea to ^ladam Havelaar, 
whose nose is a little en iiomme de terre” 

Havelaar would not speak of the first theorem, but the 

second one — “ Oh,” he said, as if he had to reply, 

though his guests had been too polite to speak their 

thoughts, “ I will explain that to you. Tine ” 

“ Dear IMax !” she said entreatingly ; and she meant by 
these words to say, “ Do not tell these gentlemen why I 
should be in your estimation elevated above a bad cold. . . ." 

Havelaar appeared to understand Avhat Tine meant; 
for he replied, “ Very well, dear.” But do you know, 
gentlemen, that one is often deceived in estimating the 
rights of men by material imperfections ? I am quite 
sure that his guests never heard of these rights. 

“ I knew a little girl in Sumatra,” he continued, “ the 



190 


MAX HAVELAAK. 


(laughter of a datoo^ . . . well then, I am certain that she 
had no claim to such imperfection ; and yet I saw her 
fall into the water in a shipwreck just like another. I, a 
man, had to help her to land.” 

“ But ought she to have flown like a sea-mew ?” 

" Certainly, . . . or, no . . . she ought not to have had 
a body. Would you have me tell you how I became 
acquainted with her ? It was in ’42, I was Controller at 
Natal.^ Have you been there, Vorbrugge ? ” 

" Yes.” 

“ Now then, then you know that pepper is cultivated at 
Natal. The pepper-grounds are situated at Taloh-Baleh, 
north of Natal, near the coast. I had to inspect them, 
and having no knowledge of pepper, I took with me in 
the pirogue® (prnA-oc) a datoo — some one who knew more 
about it than I. Ilis daughter, then a child of thirteen 
years, Avent w’ith \is. We sailed along the coast and found 
it very wearisome.” 

"And then you Avere shipAvrecked ?” 

“ No, it Avas fine AA'eathcr . . . the shipwreck happened 
many years afteiAvards ; otherAvisc I should not have been 
weary. AVe sailed along the coast, and it Avas fearfully 
hot. Such a pirogue gives little occasion for rcslaxation, 
and, moreover, I Avas then in a A^ery bad humour, to Avhich 


' Datoo — a petty chief in Sumatra. 

^ Natal in Sumatra — to be cotifounded with Natal in Africa. 
® Pirogue = piragm, a canoe formed of two trees united. 



MAX HAVELAAB. 


191 


many causes had contributed. First of all, I had an un- 
fortunate love, — ^that was in those days my daily bread ; — 
but, moreover, I found myself in a state between two 
attacks of ambition. I had made myself a king, and been 
dethroned, I had climbed up a tower, and had fallen down 
again to the ground .... I shall now pass by the reason 
of this. Enough, I was sitting there in that pirogue with 
a sour face and a bad humour ; I was, as the Germans 
call it, ungmiesslar. I thought it derogatory to inspect 
pepper-fields, and that I ought a long time ago to have 
had the appointment of governor of a solar system. More- 
over, I thought it moral murder to put a spirit like mine 
in a pirogue with that stupid datoo and his child. I have 
to tell you that generally speaking I liked the Malay 
chiefs very much, and harmonized well with them. They 
even possess qualities which make me prefer them to the 
Javanese grandees. Yes, I know, Verbrugge, that you do 
not agree with me in this matter, there are but few who 
do . . . but I leave this question now. If I had performed 
this voyage on another day, when less restless, I should 
perhaps immediately have commenced a conversation 
with this datoo, and perhaps have found that it was -w^orth 
my while. I’orhai)s the little girl would have spoken 
too, and that would have entertained me ; for a child has 
generally something original, — though I was still myself 
too much a child to take an interest in originality. Now 
this is otherwise; now I see in every girl of tliirteen 



192 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


years old a manuscript, in which little or nothing has 
been effaced. They surprise the author en n^gligi, and 
that is often pretty. 

‘‘ The child was stringing coral beads, and this seemed 
to absorb all her attention. Three red, one black . . . 
three red, one black ... it was pretty 1 

Her name was ' Si Oepi Ketch.* This means in 
Sumatra about the same as ‘little miss.* . . . Yes, Ver- 
brugge, you know it, but Duclari has always served in 
Java. Her name was ‘ Si Oepi Keteh,* but in my thoughts 
I called her ‘ poor creature,* because I was exalted in my 
own ideas so very much above her. 

“ It was afternoon . . . almost evening ; the corals were 
laid aside. The land passed slowly by, and grew fainter 
and fainter behind us. To the left, far in the west, above 
the wide, wide ocean, which has no limit as far as Mada- 
gascar — the sun set over Africa, and his beams fell — more 
and more obliquely on the waves, and sought for coolness 
in the sea. Y' hat the dickens is it ? ** 

“What? the sun ?’* 

“ No, no ... I used to make verses. . . 

“ Thou askest why the ocean stream, 

That washes Natal’s shore, 

Elsewhere so gentle and serene, 

Is known to boil and roar. 

“ Thou askest the poor fisher’s son, 

Who scarce can understand ; 



MAX IIAVELAAR. 


193 


And he points out th’ horizon dun, 

Without a trace of land. 

He casts a glance of his dark eye 
Along the Western main; 

And he and you can nought descry 
But sea, and sea again. 

“ And here the Ocean tears the land. 

And beats the sandy shore. 

Because from Madagascar’s strand 
There ’s sea and nothing more — 

“ A sea where shrieks of terror wild, 

To all the world unknown, 

Unheard by friend, or wife, or child. 

Are heard by God alone ! 

“ A hand with agonizing bound. 

Oft sprang above the wave ; 

And snatched, iind clutched, and swung around. 

For something that could save. 

“ But there was nought to give a hold : 

The waves that on him pressed, 

Soon o'er his head for ever rolled 

And * * * *» 

“ I don’t know the rest !” 

“You could ascertain it/’ said Verbrugge, “by writing 
to Krijgsman, who was your clerk at Natal ; he knows it.” 

“ How did he get hold of it ?” asked Max. 

" Perhaps out of your waste-basket. But certain it is 

N 



194 


MAX HAVELAAB. 


that he has it. Does not then follow the story of the fall 
of man, which made the island sink, that formerly pro- 
tected Natal’s coast .... the history of Djiwa and the 
two brothers ?” 

“That is true. This legend — was no legend at aU, it 
was a parable which I made, and which two hundred years 

hence will be a legend if Krijgsinan often relates it. 

Such has been the origin of aU legends. Djiwa is ‘soul’ 
as you know. . . .” 

" Max, what became of the little girl with the coral 
beads?” asked Tine. 

“ They had been laid aside. It was six o’clock, and 
there under the equator — Natal being a few minutes 
north of it [when I went on horseback to Ayer-Bangie, 
I made my horse walk over the equator, or almost walk ; 
fearing I should fall over it] — it wa.s six o’clock, a signal 
for evening thoughts Now, I think that a man in the 
evening is always a little better, or less vicious, than in 
the morning — and that is natural. A Controller wipes his 
eyes, and dreads meeting an Assistant Eesident, who 
assumes a foolish ascendency because he has been a few 
years more in the service ; or has to measure fields that 

day, and is in doubt between his honesty ^you do not 

know that, Duelari, because you are a military man ; but 

there are indeed honest Controllers then he is in doubt 

between that honesty and the fear that liadeen Demang 
So-and-so will desire to have that grey horse that ambles 



MAX HAVELAAE. 


195 


so well ; — or, he has to say that day Yes or No in answer 

to letter Nfi . In a word, when you awake in the 

morning, the world falls on your heart; and that is a 
heavy burden for a heart, even when it is strong. 

“ B\it when it is evening you pause. There are ten 
hours; thirty-six thousand seconds before you will see 
your official coat again. That allures every one. That is 
the moment when I hope to die ... to arrive yonder 
with an unofficial face. That is the moment when your 
wife finds something once more in your face of what 
caught her when she allowed you to keep that pocket- 
handkerchief with an ‘ E ’ in the corner . . .” 

“ And before she had time to catch a bad cold.” 

“ Ah, don’t disturb me ... I only mean to say, that 
during the evening one is more susceptible {gemUthlicher). 
So when the sun set, I became a better man, as the first 
proof of my improvement may show, and said to the little 
girl— 

“ ‘ Now it will soon be cooler.’ 

“ ‘ Yes, sir,’ she replied. 

“ But I loAvered my dignity still further, and commenced 
a conversation with this poor creature. My merits were 
still greater, because she replied little. I was right in all 
that I said ; which is annoying, even in spite of one’s 
arrogance. 

" ‘ Shoidd you like to go again to Taloh-Baleh ? ’ I 
asked. 



196 


MAX IIAVELAAB. 


“ ‘ As you please, sir.’ 

“ ‘ No, I ask ym if you tliink such an excursion agree- 
able ? ’ 

“ ‘ If my father does,’ she replied. — ^Was not this enough 
to anger me? Well, then, I did not get angry, the sun 
had set, and I felt myself good {gennilthlicK) enough not 
to be disheartened by so much stiipidity ; or rather, I 
believe, I began to enjoy hearing my own voice, — for few 
amongst us do not like to listen to their own voices, — 
and after my muteness during the whole day, I thought, 
now that I did speak, it merited something better than 
the silly replies of ‘ Si Oei)i Keteh.’ 

“ I will tell her something, I thought, then I shall hear 
it too, without wanting any replies. Now you know that, 
as at the unloading of a ship, the ‘ Kranjany ’ (cask) of 
sugar last put on board is the first to be taken out, so 
we generally unload first that thought or tale that was 
acquired last. In the periodical paper, ‘ Dutch India', I 
had read not long before a story by Jerome, ‘ TheJajpanese, 
Stone-Cutter.’ . . . This Jerome has written many beau- 
tiful things. Did you read his ' Auction in the House of 
the Dead ’ ? And his ‘ Tomhs ’ ? And, above all, the 
‘ Pedatti ’ t I will give you the last. I had just read 
‘ The Japanese Stom-Cutter’ .... Now I suddenly re- 
member that my anger that day was connected with the 
perilousness of the Natal roads .... You know, Ver- 
brugge, that no man-of-war can approach these roads. 



MAX HAVELAAK. 


197 


certainly not in July . . . Yes, Duclari, the rainy season 
is there at its height in July, quite different from here . . . 
now then, the perilousness of these roads was linked with 
my mortified ambition. I had often proposed to the 
Resident to construct at Natal a breakwater, or at least 
an artificial harbour at the mouth of the river, with a 
view to bring commerce into the district of Natal, which 
unites the hattah districts with the sea. One million and a 
half of inhabitants in the interior do not know what to do 
with their produce, because the Natal roads are so bad. 
Now then, these proposals had not been tapproved by the 
Resident, or at least he asserted that tlie Government 
would not approve of them, and you know that the Resi- 
dents never propose anything but what they know pretty 
well beforehand will be agreeable to the Government. 
The making of a harbour at Natal was in principle con- 
tradictory of tlie separate system ; and far from encouraging 
ships there, it Avas even forbidden to admit ships Avith 
yards on the roads, unless in case of superior force. Yet 
when a ship came — they were mostly American whalers, 
or French ships that had loaded pepper in the small in- 
dependent countries on the north side — I ahvays caused 
a letter to be written by the captain, Avherein he asked 
permission to take in fresh water. My anger about the 
miscarriage of my efforts to do something for the benefit 
of Natal, or rather my offended vanity at being still of so 
little consequence that I could not even have a harbour 



198 


MAX HAVKLAAK. 


made where I liked, and all this in connexion with my 
candidateship for the ruling of a solar system, — all this 
made me so peevish that day. When I recovered a little 
at sunset, for discontent is a sickness exactly, — this sick- 
ness reminded me of the Japanese stone-cutter, and per- 
haps I only thought this history aloud, in order to take 
the last drop of the medicine which I felt that I wanted, 
whilst I imposed upon myself by saying that I did it out 
of benevolence for the child. But she, the child, cured me, 
for some days at least, better than any tale. 

“ Oepi ! There was a man who cut stones out of a 
rock. This labour was heavy, and he laboured much ; 
but his wages were small, and ho was not content. He 
sighed because his labour was heavy, and he cried, ‘ 0 
that I were rich, in order to re.st on a baleh-haleh} with 
klamhoo.’ ^ 

“ And there came an angel out of heaven, who said, ‘ Be 
it as you have said.’ 

“ And he was rich. And he rested on a baleh-baleh, and 
the klamboo was of red silk. 

“And the king of the country passed with horsemen 
before his carriage, and likewise behind the carriage there 
were horsemen, and the golden pajong^ was held over the 
head of the king. 

^ Baleh-baleh = couch. ® Klamhoo = curtains. 

® Ptijong — umbrella — distinctive of rank — a golden one being the 
highest. 



MAX HAVELAAB. 


199 


“ And as soon as the rich man heard this, he was sad, 
because they held no golden ‘ pajong ’ over his head, and 
he was not content. He sighed and cried, ‘ I should like 
to he a king.’ 

“ And there came an angel out of heaven and said, ‘ Be 
it as you have said.’ 

“ And he became a king. And before his carriage were 
many horsemen, and behind were also horsen^,en, and over 
his head they lield the golden ‘ pajong.’ 

“And the sun shone with hot beams, and burned the 
earth in such a manner that the grass was dried up. 

“ And the king complained that the sun burned his face, 
and had more power than he ; and he was not satisfied. 

“ He sighed, and cried, ‘ I should like to be the sun.’ 

“ And there came an angel out of heaven who said, ‘ Be 
it as you have said.’ 

“ And he became the sun. And he sent up his beams 
on high, and down to the earth ; to the right and to the 
left everywhere. 

“ And he burned up the gra.ss on the earth, and the faces 
of the princes who were on the earth. 

“ And a cloud came between him and the earth, and the 
beams of the sun were turned back. 

“ And he was angry that his power was resisted ; and he 
complained that this cloud had more power than he ; and 
he was dissatisfied. 

“ He desired to be the cloud that was so mighty. 



200 


MA.X HAVELAAR. 


“ And there came an angel from heaven who said, ‘ Be 
this as you have said.’ 

“ And he became a cloud, and placed himself between 
the sun and the earth, and intercepted the beams, so that 
the grass became green. 

“ And the cloud rained in large drops on the earth, and 
made the rivers swell, and the ' banjers ’ carried away the 
herds. 

" And the cloud devastated the field witli much water. 

“ And it fell on a rock which did not move, and rattled 
in large streams, but the rock tlid not yield. 

“ And the cloud was angry because the rock would not 
yield ; and because the strength of its streams was vain. 
And it was not contented. 

“ It cried, ‘ This rock has more power than I have. I 
wish to be this rock.’ 

“ And there came an angel out of heaven who said, ‘ Be 
this as you have said.’ 

" And it became a rock, and moved neither when the sun 
shone nor when it rained. 

“ And there came a man with pickaxe and sharp chisel, 
and heavy hammer, who cut stones out of the rock. 

“ And the rock said, ‘ What is this, that the man has 
power over me, and cuts stones out of my bosom ? ’ And 
it was discontented. 

“ It cried, ‘ I am weaker than he, I should like to be 
that man.’ 



MAX IIAVELAAR. 


201 


And there came an angel out of heaven who said, ‘ Be 
this as you have said.* 

And he became a stone-cutter. And he cut stones out 
of the rock with heavy labour, and he laboured hard for 
small wages, and was contented.*’ 

“Very nice,” said Duclari, “but now you still owe us 
the proof that this little ^ Oepi * ought to have been im- 
ponderable.” 

“ No, T did not promise to prove that. T only desired 
to tell you how I got acquainted with her. When I had 
done with my story, I asked : ‘ And you, “ Oepi,” what 
would you choose, if an angel from heaven came to ask 
you what you desired ?* ” 

“ Sir, T should pray him to take me with him to 
heaven.*’ 

“ Is not that beautiful ?** said Tine to her guests, who 
perhaps thought it very foolish. 

Ilavelaar stood upon his legs, and wiped away some- 
thing from his forehead. 



CHAPTER XIL 

[continuation of stern’s composition.] 

“ Dear Max,” said Tine, onr dessert is so scanty 

would you not ^you remember Madam Geoffrin ?” 

Talk to us of something else than pastry ? What the 
deuce ! T am hoarse ; it is Verbrugge’s turn.” 

''Yes, Mr. Verbruggel Please relieve Max,” said 
Madam Havelaar. Verbrugge hesitated for a moment ; 
and began : 

"Once upon, a time there was a man, who stole a 
turkey.” 

" Oh you rogue,” cried Havelaar, " that is from Padang ! 
And how does it go on ?” 

" It is finished. Do you know tlie end of this story ?” 

" To be sure, T ate the turkey in company witli .... 
somebody. Do you know why I was suspended at 
Padang ?” 

" People said that there was a deficit in your cash at 
Natal,” replied Verbrugge. 

" That is not altogether untrue, but neither is it true. 
From many causes I had been very careless in my pecu- 



MAX HAVELAAR. 


203 


niary responsibilities at Natal, on which many observa- 
tions were made. But this happened in those days very 
often : matters in Northern Sumatra were, soon after the 
pacification of Baros, Tapos, and Singkel,^ so confused, all 
was so turbulent, that fault could not be found with a 
young man who was more inclined to be on horseback 
than at the desk, or in keeping cash-books in order. It 
could not be expected that everything would be in such 
strict order as if an Amsterdam bookkeeper had been in 
charge with nothing else to do. The Battah-cowwtYiQ^ were 
in revolt, and you know, Verbriigge, how all that happens 
there reacts on Natal. 1 slept every night in my clothes, 
to be ready for anything : which was often necessary. 
Moreover there was danger, — a few days before iny arrival 
a plot had been discovered to revolt and murder my prede- 
cessor, and danger has something attractive, above all to a 
man of twenty-two, and this attractiveness makes him the 
more incapable for office-work, or the stiff accuracy which 
is wanted for the proper management of money matters. 
Moreover, I had all sorts of nonsense in my head 

“ It is not necessary,'' said Madam Ilavelaar in reply to 
a man-servant. 

^ Three Dutch settlements on the west coast of North Sumatra. 
Singkel is the most northern of the Dutch possessions in that island, 
and is separated by a river of the same name from the still inde- 
pendent little states of Troomon and Analaboo. Still further north 
commences the Sultanat of Atchin. The whole coast from Ayer-Bangie 
to the northern point -is known to sailors by name of Pepper Coast. 



204 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


“ What is not necessary ?” 

“ I had told them to make something ready in the 

kitchen an omelet — or some such thing.” 

" Ah ! . . . . and that is not necessary, because 1 have 
begun my story — that is naughty, Tine. Very well, as 
far as I am concerned ; but these gentlemen have also a 
voice in the matter. Verbrugge ! what do you likc?- - 
your share of the omelet or the story ?” 

“ That is a difficult choice for a polite man,” said Ver- 
brugge. 

“ Nor should I like to choose,” added Duclari, “ for it 

would be a verdict between man and wife ; and ” 

“ Enire Vicorce ct le hois, il m fant pas metire le doigt.” 

■“ I wUl help you, gentlemen, the omelet is ... ” 

“ Madam,” said the courteous Duclari, “ the omelet will 
certainly be worth as much . . . . ” 

“ As the story ? Certainly, if it is worth anything ; 
but there is a difficulty . . . . ” 

“ I wager that there is no sugar in the house,” said 
Verbrugge ; “ pmy fetch from mine whatever you want.” 

“ There is sugar, from Madam Sloteriiig ; no, it is not 
that. If the omelet were good, that would not matter. . . .” 
“ What then. Madam ; has it fallen into the fire ? ” 

“ I wish it had. No, it cannot fall into the fire ; it 
is .... ” 

“ But, Tine,” said Havelaar, “ what is it then ?” 

" It is imponderable. Max ! as your women at Arles 



MAX IIAVELAAR. 


205 


.... ought to have been. I have no omelet 1 have 

nothing more.'* 

‘'Then, for heaven’s sake, the story,” said Duclari in 
droll despair. 

“ But we have coffee,” cried Tine. 

“ Good ! Then we shall drink coffee in the fore-gallery,^ 
and let us invite Madam Slotering and the girls,” said 
Plavelaar, whereupon the small company moved. 

“ I suppose that she will not come, Max ; you know 
that she prefers not to dine with us, and in this I cannot 
say that she is wrong.” 

“ She may have heard that I tell stories,” said Havelaar, 
'' and that must have frightened her.” 

'' You are wrong there. Max ! This would not harm her 
— she doesn’t understand Dutch. No, she told me that 
she wished to have her own household ; and I understand 
that very well. You know how you translated my name 
— ‘ E. H. V. W.’ ” 

Eigen Haakd veel Waard.”^ 

‘"Just so: she is quite right; she seems, moreover, a 
little unsociable. Only fancy, she makes the servants 
drive away all strangers that come near the house. ...” 

“ I beg for the story or the omelet,” said Duclari. 

^ Such a fore-gallery is open on threa sides and supported by pillars. 
The reader will find a description of an Indian house in/m, p. 231. 

2 Eigen Haard veel One’s own hearth is worth much.” 

(There’s no place like home.) The lady’s name was Everdine Huberte 
van Wynbergen. 



206 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


'' So do I/' cried Verbnigge ; “ evasions are not accepted. 
We are entitled to a complete dinner, and therefore I ask 
. for the history of the turkey.” 

“ I have told you that already,” said Havelaar : I stole 
the turkey from General van Damme, and ate it with 
somebody^ 

“ Before something went to heaven,” said Tine playfully. 

" No, that 's an evasion,” cried Duclari, we want to 
know why you stole that turkey.” 

“ Well, because I was hungry, and that was the fault of 
General van Damme, who had suspended me.” 

If you don’t tell me more than that, I will bring an 
omelet next time myself,” complained Verbrugge. 

Believe me, it was nothing more than that. He had 
many turkeys, and I had none. These birds were driven 
before my door; I took one, and said to the man who 
imagined that he watched them, ‘ Tell the General that I, 
Max Havelaar, take this turkey, because I want to eat it.’ ” 

“ And what about that epigram ? ” 

“ Did Verbrugge speak to you about it ?” 

“ Yes.” 

“ That has nothing to do with the turkey. That was 
because lie had suspended so many functionaries : there 
were at Padang seven or eight of them whom he had sus- 
pended, with more or less justice, from their functions. 
Many amongst them deserved it less than I. The Assist- 
ant Eesident of Padang himself had been suspended, and 



MAX HAVELAAR. 


207 


for a reason which, as I believe, was quite a different one 
from that given in the decision. I must tell you, however, 
that I cannot assure you that I know all about it, and that 
I say only what was thought to he true at Padang, and 
what may have been true, when taking into consideration 
above all the peculiarities of the General. 

“ He married his wife to gain a wager of an anker of 
wine. He often went out in the evening, and went every- 
where. Mr. Valkenaar on one occasion so respected his 
incognito, that in a small street near the girls’ orphan- 
house, he gave him a thrashing, as a common disturber of 

the public peace. Not far from that place lived Miss . 

There was a rumour that this Miss had given birth 

to a child, that had disappeared. The Assistant Resident 
was about to examine into the matter, and seems to have 
expressed his intention at a whist-party at the General’s. 
The next day he received an order to go to a certain dis- 
trict, whose Controller had been suspended from his func- 
tions because of true or supposed dishonesty, there to 
examine and report upon these affairs. The Assistant 
Kesident certainly wondered that he was charged with a 
thing that had no connexion Avhatever with his district ; 
but as he could, strictly speaking, consider this charge as 
an honourable distinction, and as he was on very good 
terms with the General, so that he had no cause to think 

of a snare, he acquiesced in the mission, and went to 

I don’t know where, to execute his orders. After some 



208 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


^time lie returns and makes a report, that was not unfavour- 
able to the Controller. But lo! the public (that is, 'no- 
body and every one ’) at Padang had now discovered that 
the Controller had only been suspended to afford an 
opportunity for the removal of the Assistant Eesident from 
the place, in order to prevent Jiis intended investigation 
of the disappearance of that child, or at least to delay it 
till it would be more difficult to clear up -the mystery. I 
now rejieat that I do not know whether that was true, 
but since my better acquaintance with General van 
Damme, it appears to me very credible ; and at Padang 
likewise there was nobody who did not think him capable 
of such a thing, considering how very bad his morals were. 
Most people only gave him credit for one quality, intre- 
pidity in danger ; and if I, who have seen him in danger, 
stuck to the opinion that he was, after all, a courageous 
man, that alone would induce me to withhold this story. 
It is true that he, in Sumatra, had caused many ' to be 
sabred down,’ but that ought to have been seen more 
closely, to form a correct estimate of his valour; and, 
however strange it may appear, I believed that he owed 
his military glory in a great measure to the spirit of con- 
tradiction which animates us all more or less. One readily 
admits, it is true, that Peter or Paul is this, or that ; but 
what he is, that one must leave him, and never can you 
be so sure to be praised as when you have a great, a very 
apparent fault. You, Verbrugge, are drunk every day . . 



MAX HAVELAAR. 


209 


asked Verbrugge, who was a pattern of tein- 

perance. 

Yes, I make you drunk^eve^ day. You forget yourself 
so far that Duclari tumbles over you in the fore-gallery. 
That he will find unpleasant, but he will immediately 
remember to have seen some^Jiing good in you, which he 
did not remark before^* And when I come, and I find you 
thus horizontal then he will put his hand on my arm and 
say, " Oh, believe me, he is otherwise such a good, honest, 
nice fellow 

say that of Verbrugge, even when he is vertical '' 
said Duclari. 

Not with the same fire and persuasion. Think of it, 
how often one hears peoide say, ' Oh, if this man would be 

attentive to his business, he would be somebody, but ’ 

and then comgs the story, how that he is not attentive to 
business, and is, therefore, nobody. I believe that I know 
the reason of this. Of those that are dead we always hear 
good qualities which we never before perceived. This is 
because they are in nobody’s xvay. All men are more or 
less concurrents ; we should like to place everybody else 
completely under us, and to have all things under us. 
Politeness, even self-interest, prevents the confession of 
this, for very soon nobody would believe us, even if we 
asserted something true. A subterfuge is sought for, and 
look how we do it. When you, Duclari, say, * Lieutenant 
Slobkous is a good soldier, to be sure he is a good soldier, 


o 



210 


MAX IIAVELAAR. 


I cannot sufficiently express wliat a good soldier Lieutenant 
Slobkous is, ... . but ^le is no theorist . . . did you 
not say so, Duclari ? ” 

“ I never knew or saw a Lieutenant Slobkous.” 

“ Very well, make one, and say that of him.” 

“ Well, I make him, and say it.” 

“ Do you know what you have now said ? You have 
said that ymi, Duclari, are thoroughly acq^uainted with 
theory. I am not a bit better. Believe me, we arc wrong 
to be so angry with one who is very bad, for the good 
ones amongst us are very near the bad. Suppose we 
call perfection 0, and take 100 degrees to be bad, 
how very wrong we are then, who fluctuate between 98 
and 99, to call shame on a person who stands at 101. 
And still I believe that many do not attain the 100th 
degree for want of good qualities, courage, for instance, to 
be quite what 1 is.” 

" At what degree do I stand. Max ?” 

“ I want a magnifying-glass for the subdmsions. Tine.” 

“I object,” cried Verbrugge, — “no. Madam! consider- 
ing your proximity to the 0, — no, functionaries are sus- 
pended, a child is lost, a General is accused. . . .” 

“ But where ’s the story ?” 

“ Tine, take care that next time there is something in 
the house. No, Verbrugge, you will not get ‘the story’ 
until I have been a little time longer on my hobby-horse, 
on the spirit of contradiction. 1 said eveiy man sees in 



MAX HAVELAAE. 


211 


his fellow-creature a sort of rival. One must not always 
blame what is but too obvious, tlmrefore, we like to exalt 
a good quality excessively, to make the bad quality (which 
is properly the only tiling we . want to reveal) the more 
obvious, without displaying the appearance of partiality. 
If any one comes to mo complaining that I have called 
him a thief, when I have also called his daughter a lovely 
girl, then I reply ; ‘ How can you be so angry since I have 
called your daughter a lovely girl ? ’ Do you see, I win 
both ways. Each of us is a grocer; I take away his 
customers, who will not buy raisins of a thief , — and at 
the same time, it is said that I am a good man, because 
I praise the daughter of a rival in business.” 

“ No, it is not so bad,” said Duclari ; “ that is going 
much too far.” 

“ You think so, because I made the comparison a little 
short and blunt. You must mitigate it a little. But if 
wo must indeed acknowledge that somebody is in the pos- 
session of a quality which merits esteem, respect, or credit, 
then we are pleased to discover, near this quality, some- 
thing which releases us in part or altogether of this tribute. 

“ To such a poet we should bow, but .... he beats 
his wife. You see, then, we like to use the hlack and hhie 
of this wife as a motive to keep our backs straight ; and 
in the end we are pleased that he beats the poor creature, 
--a practice which in any other case we should condemn. 
If we must acknowledge that somebody possesses qualities 



212 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


that allow him the honour of a statue, if we can no 
longer deny his claims thereto without being thought 
ignorant, insensible, or jealous, then we say, ‘ Well : set 
him up ! ’ But already, while mounting him upon the 
pedestal, and while he himself still thinks that we are 
full of admiration of his excellence, we have already made 
the noose in the lasso, that is intended, on the first favour- 
able opportunity, to pull him down. The greater the 
changes among tlie occupiers of pedestals to have a turn 
too, and this so true, that we from habit, and for exercise, 
like a sportsman who shoots crows which he does not hag, 
like to pull down even these statues, whose foot-piece 
never can be mounted by us. If Kappelman lives on 
sauerkraut and hard beer, he likes to say : ‘ Alexander 
was not great .... he was intemperate,’ whilst there 
exists for Kai)pelman not the least chance of rivalry with 
Alexander in conquering the world. How this may be, 
I am sure that many never would have the idea that 
General Van Uamme was so very brave, if his bravery 
could not have served as a vehicle for the always added : 

‘ but . . . his morality!’ And at the same time, that 
this immorality would not have been much thought of by 
many, who were not themselves so very invulnerable in 
this respect, if it had not been wanted to counterbalance 
his renown for prowess, which disturbed the slumbers of 
some. One quality he possessed in a very high degree 
— energy. What he intended to happen did generally 



MAX IIAVELAAU. 


213 


happen. Yoxi see, however, I have immediately an. anti- 
thesis ready — but in the choice of the means he was 
very free, and, as Van der Palm^ has said, as I believe 
unjustly, of Napoleon, ' Obstacles of morality never ar- 
rested him,’ and then it is certainly easier to attain your 
aim than when you think yourself bound by such rule. 

“ The Assistant Eesident of Padang had made a report 
that sounded favourably for his suspended Controller, 
whose suspension got in this way a colour of injustice. 
The Padang scandal continued : people always were talk- 
ing about the disappearance of the child; the Assistant 
Kesident was again obliged to notice the matter; but 
before he could clear up the mystery, he received an order, 
whereby he was suspended by the Governor of AVestern 
Sumatra ‘ because of negligence.’ He bad, as it was said, 
out of friendsliip or pity, and while he knew l)etter, repre- 
sented the matter of the Controller in a false light. I did 
not read the documents concerning this affair; but I know 
that the Assistant Eesident was not in the least con- 
nected with this Controller, which is already evident from 
his having been chosen to examine the matter. I know, 
moreover, that he was an estimable person, and the 
Government thought so too, which ai)pears from the 
annulling of the suspension after the affair had been 

^ Johannes Henricus Van der Palm, a celebrated Dutch author and 
orator, born 1763, died 1840 ; best known by his Bible for children 
and his Bible translations. 



214 


MAX HAVELAAH. 


examined elsewhere than on the west coast of Sumatra. 
This Controller also was afterwards restored to his honour. 
It was their suspension which inspired me with the epi- 
gram that I caused to be put down on the General’s 
breakfast-table by somebody who was then in his service, 
and had been formerly in mine — 

‘ Suspension on legs, the suspension that rules — 

Old Jack the Suspender, the bogie of fools — 

Would surely his Conscience itself have suspended. 

Were ’t not that it long ago finally ended ! ^ 

“ Such a thing was not proper,” said Duclari. 

“ I quite agree ; . . . but I was bound to do something. 
Only fancy : I had no money, received nothing : that I 
feared every day starvation, which in reality I was very 
near, I had few or no relations at Padang, and, moreover, 
I told the General that he was responsible if I j)erished 
from hunger, and that I should accept aid of nobody. In 
the interior there were persons who, on hearing what had 
happened, invited me to come to their homes; but the 
General prohibittjd the issue of my passport thither. 
Neither was I allowed to go to Java. Anywhere else 1 
could have managed it, and perliaps there too, if people 
had not been so afraid of the mighty General. It ap- 

' “ Het wand’lend schorabcsliiit, dat schorsend ona regeert, 

Jan Schorsal, Gouverncur, de weerwolf onzer dagen. 

Had zijn geweten zelf met vreugd geauspendeerd, — 

Ala ’t niet voor langen tijd finaal reeda ware ontalagea.” 



MAX HAVKLAAK. 


215 


peared to be his intention to let me starve. Such a state 
of things lasted nine months !” 

" And how did you live all that time ? had the General 
plenty of turkeys ?” 

“ No, I did that only once ... I made verses, and 
wrote comedies .... and so on.” 

“ And was that enough to buy rice at Padaiig ?” 

“ No, but I did not ask that for it, ... I would rather 
not say how I lived.” 

Tine pressed his hand ; she knew it. 

“ I have read a few lines which you wrote at that time 
on the back of a receipt,” said Verbnigge. 

“ I know what you mean ; the lines give you an idea of 
my position. There was at that time a periodical paper, 
the ‘ Copyist! to which I subscribed. As it was iiuder the 
protection of the Government, the editor being an official 
under the General Secretary, the subscribers’ money went 
into the Exchequer. They offered me a receipt for twenty 
guilders. As this money had to be booked at the Gover- 
nor’s office, and the receipt, if the money was not paid, 
had to pass these offices to be sent back to Batavia, I 
made use of this opportunity, and protested against my 
poverty on the back of the paper. 

‘ Yingt florins . . . quel tresor ! Adieu lilt^rature. 

AdieUy Copiste, adieu ! Trap malheureux destin. 

Je meurs de faim, de froi/J, de soif, et de chagrin . . . 

Vingt florins font pour moi deux mois de nourriture. 



216 


MAX HAVELAAK. 


Si favais vingt florins . . . je serais mieux hotti, 

Mieux nourri, mieux logi, fen ferais honne cMre. 

II fatvt vivre avant tout, soit vie de misere. 

Le crime fait la honte, et non la pauvrete' 

But when, afterwards, I went to the publishers of the 
‘ Gopyistl to give them my twenty guilders, I was told 
that I owed nothing. It appears that the General had 
himself paid the money for me, to prevent this illustrated 

I’eceipt being sent back to Batavia. But what did he 

do, after the taking away of that turkey — ? 

It was a theft ; and after that epigram ? ” 

“ He punished me terribly. If he had accused me as 
being guilty of want of respect for the Governor of Western 
Sumatra, which could have been explained in those days 
with a little ingenuity, as an endeavour to undennine, to 
revolt, ‘ or as theft on the public road,’ lie would have 
showed himself to be a right-minded man. But no, he 
punished me better! He ordered the man who had to 
watch the turkeys to choose henceforth another road; 
and as to my epigram . . . that is still worse — ^lie said 
nothing, and did nothing. You see that was cruel ! He 
did not grant me the smallest claim to be a martyr ... I 
did not become interesting by persecution, and was not 
allowed to be unhappy through excess of wit ... it 
was enough to disgust me once for all with epigrams and 
turkeys. So little encouragement extinguishes the flame 
of genius to the last spark 1 I never did it again ! ” 



CHAPTEE XIII. 


[composed by stekn.] 

“And may we now hear why you were suspended?** 
asked Duclari. 

“ Oh yes ; for as I can assure you of, and even prove, the 
truth of all that I say on the subject, you will see that I 
did not act rashly, when I, in telling the story about that 
lost child, did not quite disregard the scandal of Padang ; 
because you will think it very credible, as soon as I shall 
have made you acquainted with this General in affairs 
that concern myself, 

“ There were in my accounts at Natal inaccuracies and 
omissions. You know how every inaccuracy ends in loss : 
inaccuracy never increases money. It is pretended that 
I was short of thousands. But, observe, they did not tell 
me that so long as I was at Natal. Quite unexpectedly I 
received an appointment in the highlands of Padang. You 
know, Verbrugge, that in Sumatra an appointment to the 
Padang highlands is considered as more profitable and 
more agreeable than one in the Northern Eesideiicy. As 



218 


MAX lIAVELAAlj. 


the Governor had visited me a short time before — by and 
by you will know why, and how — and things had happened 
in my house, in which I thought I had acted as a man ; 
I accepted this appointment as a distinction, and set out 
from Natal for Padang. I made the passage on board 
a French ship, the ‘Baobab,’ of Marseilles, which had 
loaded pepper at Atchin, and, of course, on arriving at 
Natal was in want of fresh water. As soon as I arrived 
at Padang, with the intention to depart from there to the 
interior, I wished, as in duty bound, to visit the Governor, 
but he sent word that he could not receive me ; and, at 
the same time, that I must delay my setting out for my 
new sihiation till further orders. You may believe that 
I was very much surprised at that, — the more so because 
he left me at Natal in a humour which made me think 
that he entertained a high opinion of me. I had but few 
acquaintances at Padang, but from the few I had, I heard, 
or rather perceived, that the General was very angry with 
me. I say that I perceived it, because, at a country place 
such as Padang was then, the goodwill of many can serve 
as a thermometer of the favour in which one stands in 
the eye of the Governor. I felt that a storm was near, 
without knowing from which point of the compass the 
wind would come. As I was in want of money, I asked 
one and another of my friends to lend me some, and was 
quite astonished that I was met everywhere by a refusal. 
At Padang, as everywhere else in the Indies, there is 



MAX HAVELAAtt. 


219 


great liberality in this respect. In every other case, a 
few hundred guilders would have been lent with pleasure 
to a Controller who had been detained on his journey 
contrary to his expectations. But I was refused every 
assistance. I pressed some to tell me the cause of this dis- 
trust ; and by little and little I got to know at last that in 
my money matters at Natal faults and oversights had been 
discovered, which now caused me to be suspected of dis- 
honest administration. That there were faults in my 
administration I was not surprised to hear ; the contrary 
would have surprised me ; but I wondered that the Go- 
vernor, who had himself witnessed how I had always to 
stnigglc far from my office with a discontented population, 
ready to revolt at any moment ; — that he, who had him- 
self given me credit foi’ what he called ‘ manliness,’ could 
accuse me of dishonesty, as he knew better than any one 
that there could be no other question than that of 'force 
majeurc.’ And though this force imjcure was denied, 
though they wanted to make me responsible for faults 
that had happened at moments when I, often in danger of 
my life, far away from the cash or anything connected 
with it, had to intrust others with the administration of 
it, — even if it was expected that I, while doing one thing, 
ought not to have neglected the other, even then my only 
fault would have been a carelessness that had nothing in 
common with dishonesty. Moreover in those days there 
were many instances in which the Government took into 



220 


MAX HAVELAAU. 


consideration this difficult position of their functionaries 
in Sumatra ; and it seemed to he accepted as a principle 
on such occasions that some allowance should he made. 
It only required that these functionaries should make 
good the deficiency, and the word ‘ dishonest ’ was never 
pronounced without very clear proofs. This was so much 
a custom that I myself told the Governor at Natal, that I 
feared I should have to pay a good deal, after my account 
had been examined at the offices at Padang, whereupon he 
replied, shrugging his shoulders : ‘ Ah ! . . . those money 
matters . . . ’ as if he himself felt that matters of smaller 
importance ought to give place to those of greater. 

" I readily admit that money affairs are important ; but, 
however important in themselves, they wore in this case 
subordinate to other branches of duty and business. If 
through carelessness or oversight some thousands^ failed 
in my administration, I call this no trifle ; but if these 
thousands failed in consequence of my successful efforts 
to prevent a revolt, that would have devastated the dis- 
trict of Mandhdling with fire and sword, and that would 
have brought back the Atchinese to the haunts from where 
we had just driven them, with great sacrifice of blood and 
treasure, then the magnitude of the short-coming disap- 
pears, and it seems even a little unjust to make him re- 
fund who has saved infinitely more important interests. 

' 1000 guilders = £83, 6s. 8d. The English reader will bear in 
mind that when ‘ thousands ’ are spoken of, guilders are referred to. 



MAX HAVELAAK. 


221 


Yet I thought such a repayment right ; for the non-exac- 
tion of it would lay one open to a charge of dishonesty. 

" After waiting for many days, you may conceive with 
what feelings I received at last from the Governor’s Secre- 
tary a letter, in which I was given to understand that I 
was suspected of dishonesty, and I was ordered to reply 
to a number of charges that had been made against my 
administration. Some of them I could explain immedi- 
ately, for others I wanted to look at documents, and, 
above all, it was most important for me to look into these 
matters at Natal. I could have examined clerks and other 
employ^, to ascertain the causes of the mistakes, and very 
likely I should have succeeded in my endeavours to clear 
up all. The neglect, for instance, to book money that had 
been sent to Mandh41ing — [you know, Verbrugge, that 
the troops in the interior are paid out of the Natal ex- 
chequer] — or something like that, which I should, perhaps, 
have seen immediately, if I could have examined into it 
on the spot, as having been the cause of these sad faults. 
But the General refused to let me go to Natal. This re- 
fusal caused me to pay still more attention to the strange 
manner in which this accusation of dishonesty had been 
brought forward against me. Why had I been suddenly 
transferred from Natal, and under colour of good inten- 
tions to me, if I was really suspected of dishonesty ? Why 
did they communicate to me that disgraceful suspicion 
only for the first time, when I was far from the place 



222 


MAX IIAVKLAAK. 


where I should have had an opportunity to clear myself ? 
And above all, why had these affairs been brought against 
me in the most unfavourable light, contrary to the usual 
custom, and to justice ? 

“ Before I had replied to all these observations as well as I 
could without written or verbal information, I learned that 
the reason why the General was so angry with me was — 

“ ‘ Because I had opposed him so much at Natal,’ in 
which, as was added, ‘ I had done wrong.’ 

“ Now, then, I saw it all. Yes, I had opposed him ; 
but with the innocent idea that he would esteem me be- 
cause I had opposed him ; but after’ his departure nothing 
made me suppose that he was angry with me on that 
account ; stupid as I was, I liad accepted the favourable 
transfer to Padang as a proof that he had thought my 
opposition very noble. You will see how little I knew 
him then. But when I heard that this was the cause of 
the severity with which my money administration was 
condemned, I was at peace with myself. I answered 
every point as well as I could, and ended my letter, of 
which I still have a copy, with the words, ‘ I have an- 
swered the observations made on my administration as 
well as is possible without consulting documents or having 
recourse to local investigation, I beg your honour, on all 
benevolent considerations, to excuse me. I am young and 
insignificant in comparison with the power of the domi- 
nant ideas, which my principles compel me to oppose ; but 



MAX IIAVELAAR. 


223 


I remain, nevertheless, proud of my moral independence, 
proud of my honour.’ 

“ The following day I was suspended on the plea of dis- 
honest administration. The officer of justice was ordered 
to fulfil my office and duty ; and such was my position at 
Padang, when scarcely twenty -three years of age. I con- 
templated the future that must bring me infamy. People 
advised me to appeal on the score of my youth ; for I was 
still under age when the pretended mistake occurred. But 
I would not do that. Had not I thought, suffered, and 1 
daresay laboured too much already, to advance the plea 
of youth ? You may see from the end of the letter above 
named, that I would not be treated as a child, I who had 
done my duty at Natal against the Governor, and like a 
man ; and at the same time, you may perceive from this 
letter, how unfounded the accusation was which they 
brought to bear against mo ; for a guilty man writes in 
another style. I was not, however, taken into custody ; 
though this ought to have been done, if this accusation 
had been well founded. Perhaps this apparent neglect 
was not without foundation, for a prisoner must be housed 
and fed. As I could not leave Padang, I was in reality 
still a prisoner, but a prisoner without shelter and without 
bread. I had often written, but without success, to the 
General, requesting that he would not prevent my de- 
parture from Padang, for, even supposing me to be guilty, 
no crime was punishable with starvation. 



224 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


“ After the Council of Justice, which was at a loss how 
to deal with the affair, had found a way out of the diffi- 
culty by declaring itself ruiable to decide, because a prose- 
cution for crime in the service of the countrj’’ could not be 
held without the authorization of the Government at Bata- 
via, the General kept me, as I said, nine months at Padang. 

“At last he himself received instructions from head- 
quarters to let me set out for Batavia. 

“ A few years afterwards, when I had some money 

dear Tine, you had given it me 1 paid some thousand 

guilders to clear the Natal accounts of 1841 and 1842, 
and then a person, who may be considered to represent 
the Government of the Dutch Indies, said, ' I would not 
have done that in your place ... I should have drawn 
a bin of exchange on eternity.’ 

“ Ainsi va le monde ! ” 

Havelaar was about to recommence the narrative, which 
his guests expected from him, and wherein he was to ex- 
plain in what and why he had so opposed General van 
Damme at Natal, when Madam Slotering appeared in her 
fore-gaUery, beckoning to the policeman who sat on a 
bench near Havelaar’s house. The policeman went over 
to her, and then said something to a man who had just 
entered the grounds, probably intending to go to the 
kitchen that was behind the house. Our company would 
probably have paid no attention to this, if Madam Have- 
laar had not said that afternoon at dinner that Madam 



MAX HAVELAAE. 


225 


Slotering was so shy, and appeai’ed to exercise a sort of 
control over every one that came into the grounds. We 
saw the man, who had been called by the policeman, go 
to her, and she questioned him, apparently much to his dis- 
satisfaction. At least he retraced his steps, and was soon 
outside. " I am very sorry for that,” said Tine ; “ perhaps 
it was a man selling fowls, or vegetables ; I have nothing 
yet in the house.” 

“Then send some one after him,” replied Havelaar; 
“you know that native ladies like to exercise power. 
Her husband was formerly the first man in the place, 
and however small an Assistant llesident may be as an 
individual, he is in his own district a petty king ; she is 
not yet acciistomod to dethronement. We must not 
grudge this small pleasure to the poor woman ; act as 
if you did not pei’ceive it.” 

This was not difficult for Tine ; she had no desire for 
power. 

A digression is necessary here, and I even intend to 
digress about digressions. It is not easy for an author to 
sail exactly between the two rocks of the too much or too 
little, and this difficulty is enhanced if one describes situa- 
tions that have to remove the reader to unknown coun- 
tries. There exists too nice a connexion between the 
places and the events for us to be able to abstain entirely 
from describing the former ; and to avoid the two rocks, 
already mentioned, becomes doubly difficult for him who 



226 


MAX HAVKL.\AIl, 


has chosen the Indies for the scene of his narrative. For 
whereas the author who deals with European situations 
may suppose many affairs to be known, on the other hand 
he whose story refers to the Indies has continually to ask 
himself whether the non-Indian will rightly understand this 
or that. If the European reader thinks of Madam Sloter- 
ing as lodging with the Havelaars, as would be the case in 
Europe, it must appear incomprehensible that she was not 
present with the company that took coffee in the fore- 
gallery. I have certainly already observed that she lived 
in a separate house ; but to understand this aright, and 
also events to be described, it is indeed necessary to make 
you acquainted with Havelaar’s house and grounds. The 
accusation often made against the great artist who wrote 
WavcrUy, that he often abuses the patience of his readers 
by devoting too many pages to topograi^hy, seems to 
me to be unfounded, and I believe that in order to 
judge of the approjuiateness of such descriptions, one 
has only to consider - — Was this topography required ex- 
actly to convey the impression which the author wanted 
to communicate to you ? If so, do not be offended be- 
cause he expects you to take the trouble to read what he 
had taken the trouble to write. But, if it was no^ re- 
quired, then tlnow the book aside ; for the author who is 
empty-headed enough unnecessarily to give topography 
for ideas, will be very seldom worth reading, even when 
at last his topography is at an end. But the judgment of 



MAX IIAVELAAH. 


227 


tlie reader about the necessity of a deviation is often false, 
because he cannot know before the catastrophe what is 
necessary, and what not, to the systematic development of 
the situation; and when after the catastrophe he reads 
the book again — of books which one reads but once I do 
not speak — and even then thinks that this or that digres- 
sion could have been omitted without marring the impres- 
sion of the whole, the question remains whether he would 
liave had the same impression of the whole if the author 
liad not conducted him thither in a more or less artificial 
manner, just by means of the digressions which seem to 
liiin to be superfluous. 

Do you think that the deatli of Amy Eobsart would 
have touched you, if you had been a stranger in the halls 
of Kenilworth? And do you think that there is no 
connexion — connexion through contrast — between the 
rich dress wherein the unworthy Leicester showed him- 
solt to her, and the blackness of his soul ? Do you not 
understand that Leicester — every one knows this who is 
acquainted with him from other sources than the novel 
only — was infinitely worse than he was painted in Kenil- 
worth 1 But the great novelist, who liked better to 
charm by an artistic arrangement of colours than by 
coarseness of colour, thought it beneath liirn to dip 
his brush in all the mud and all the blood that clung 
to the unworthy favourite of Elizabeth. He wished to 
point out only one spot in the mud-pool; but he knew 



228 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


how to present such spots vividly to the eye, by means 
of what he put in juxtaposition, in his immortal writ- 
ings. He who thinks that all this juxtaposition may 
he rejected as superfluous, quite forgets that in so doing 
in order to bring about effects, one would be obliged to 
go over to the school which, since 1830, has flourished 
so long in France ; though I must say to the honour of 
that country, that the authors who in this respect have 
offended the most against good taste have been valued 
most in foreign countries, and not in France itself. The 
authors, — I believe that this school is now no more, — 
thought it easy to dip their hands in pools of blood .and 
throw it in great spots on the picture, in order to be able 
to see them from a distance. To be sure they are easier 
to paint, those rough lines of red and black, than the 
beautiful lines in the calyx of a lily. Therefore that 
school generally chose kings for the heroes of narratives 
by preference, from the time when the nations were still 
in their infancy. You see, the affliction of the king is 
represented on paper by cries of the people : his anger gives 
the author an opportunity to kill thousands on the field of 
battle : Ms errors give room to paint famine and plague— 
suchlike things give work to rough pencils. If you are 
not touched at the sight of the corpse that lies there, there 
is room in my narrative for another man, convulsed with 
pain, and still shrieking. Did you not weep for the 
mother, who sought in vain for her child ? — Well, I will 



MAX HAVELAAR. 


229 


show you another mother, who sees the quartering of her 
child. Did you remain unmoved at the martyrdom of 
that man ? — I increase the number a hundredfold by tor- 
turing ninety- nine at his side. Are you hardened enough 
not to shudder when seeing this soldier, who, in the 
besieged fortification, devours his left arm because of 
hunger . . . . - 

Epicure ! I propose you give order, “ Eight and left 
wheel, form circle, left files eat left arms of right files . . . 
march ! ” 

Yes, in this manner, artificial horrors become folly . . . 
which cn passant I would fain prove. 

And yet we would he reduced to this if we con- 
demned too soon an author who wished to prepare you for 
his catastrophe without having recourse to these scream- 
ing^ colours. But the danger of the other extreme is still 
greater. You despise the efforts of coarse literature, which 
thinks it must take your feelings by storm with such 
rough weapons ; but if the author falls into the other ex- 
treme, if he sins by too much deviation from the principal 
matter, by too much pencilling, then your anger is still 
greater, and quite right ; for then he has bored you, and 
that is unpardonable. 

If wo walk together and you stray every moment 
from the road, and call me into the underwood only with 
the intention to prolong the walk, I think this disagree- 

* This is a literal rendering of the word used by the author. 



230 


MAX HAVKLAAK. 


able, and intend to walk alone for the future. But if you 
can show me there a plant which I did not know before, 
or in which I may see something that I overlooked, if 
you show me from time to time a flower, which I like to 
pluck and carry in my button-hole, then I forgive your 
deviation from the road ; yes, I am grateful for it. 

And even without flower or plant, when you call me 
aside to show me through the trees the path that we shall 
walk upon by and by, but which now is still far from us 
in the depth, and which winds itself as a scarcely percep- 
tible line through the field there below, then likewise I do 
not take this deviation amiss. For when at last Ave have 

arrived thus far, I shall know how our road has wound 

through the mountain, how it is that the sun, that was a 
few minutes ago tlierc, is now on our left ; why that hill 
is now behind us, whoso summit was just now before us 
.... then through that deviation you have made it easy 

for me to comprehend my walk and to comprehend is 

to enjoy. 

lieader, I have often in my narrative left yo;i on the 
broad Avay, though it has cost me much not to take you 
with me into the underwood. I was afraid that the walk 
would wearj you, as I did not know if you would be 
pleased with the flowers and plants which I would show 
you ; but as I believe that you will afterwards be pleased 
to have seen the path Ave shall walk upon presently, I am 
obliged to tell you something about Havelaar’s house. 



MAX HAVELAAlt. 


231 


You would be very wrong to form your ideas of a house 
ill the Indies according to European notions, and to think 
of a heap of stones, small rooms piled upon large rooms, 
with the street before it, neighbours right and left, whose 
household gods lean against yours, and a little garden 
witli three gooseberry-bushes behind. With a few excep- 
tions, the houses in the Indies have but one storey. The 
European reader will think this very strange, for it is 
a peculiarity of civilisation, or what passes for it, to 
consider strange aU that is natural. The Indian houses 
are quite different from ours, but they are not strange ; mir 
houses are strange. He who was the first to allow him- 
self the luxury of not sleeping in the same room with his 
cows, put the second room of his house not upon, but next 
to the first, for to build them all on the ground is both more 
simple and more comfortable. Our high houses owe their 
origin to want of space : we seek high in the air what we 
miss on the ground ; and so every maid-servant, who in 
the evening shuts the window of her bed-room under the 
eaves, is a protest against this crowding, even when she is 
thinking, what I can readily believe, of something else. 

In those countries, also, where civilisation and over- 
crowding of the population have not yet imslied mankind 
high up, because of the pressure below, the houses are 
of one storey, and llavelaar’s did not belong to the few 
exceptions to this rule. On entering, .... but no, I 
will give a proof that I abandon all claims to the 



232 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


picturesque. “ Given,” an oblong : divide it into twenty- 
one parts, three in breadth, seven in depth. You give 
each of these partitions a number, be- 
ginning with the upper corner on the 
left-hand side, from there to the right, 
so that four comes under one, and so on. 

The first three numbers together form 
the fore- gallery, which is often open on 
three sides, and whose roof is supported 
in the front by pillars. From there, one 
enters by two folding doors, the inner 
gallery which is represented by the three following 
numbers. The partitions 7, 9, 10, 12, 13, 15, 16, and 18, 
are rooms, most of them being connected by doors with 
each other. The three last numbers form tbe open gal- 
lery behind, and what I have not mentioned is a sort 
of closed inner gallery or passage. I am very proud of 
this description.^ 

I do not know what expression is used in Holland to 
give the idea conveyed in the Indies by the word “ estate.” 
“ Estate ” is there neither garden, nor park, nor field, nor 
wood, but either something, or that, or altogether, or none 
of these. It is the ‘ ground ’ that belongs to the house, in 

* Nos. 7 and 10, 10 and 13, 13 and 16, are connected by doors with 
each other; 9 and 12, 12 and 15, 15 and 18 are connected by doors 
■with each other. Between 5 and 8 a door; between 17 and 20 a door ; 
between 7 and 8, 10 and 11, 13 and 14, 16 and 17 doors ; between 8 
and 9, 11 and 12, 14 and 15, 17 and 18 doors. 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 




MAX HAVELAAK. 


233 


so far as it is not covered by the house ; thus, in India, 
the expression, “ garden and estate” would be a pleonasm. 
There are no houses, or very few, without such ground. 
Some estates contain wood, and garden, and field, and 
make you think of a park ; others are flower-gardens ; 
elsewhere, again, the whole estate is one large grass-field ; 
and lastly, there are some very simple ones reduced to a 
macadamised square, which is perhaps less agreeable to 
the eye, but which promotes cleanliness in the houses, 
because many insects are harboured by grass or trees. 

Havelaar’s “ estate ” was very large ; yes, however 
strange it may sound, it might be called on one side 
boundless, as it was bordered by a ravine that extended 
to the shores of the Tji-Udjung, the river that sun’ounded 
Eankas-Betong with one of its many windings. It would 
be difficult to say where the ground of the Assistant Eesi- 
dent’s house ended, and where the common commenced, 
as the great ebb-tides and floods of the Tji-Udjung, which 
at this time had drawn back its shores as far as the 
horizon, and which at another time filled the ravine up 
to very near Havelaar’s house, changed its limits every 
moment. This ravine had always been a thorn in the eye 
of Madam Slotering,— that was very clear. The vegetable 
growth, everywhere so rapid in India, was always particu- 
larly luxuriant, on account of the mud that was left behind, 
to such an extent that, though the rising and falling of the 
water happened with a force that rooted up and carried 



234 


MAX HAVELAAU. 


away the underwood, a little time was sufficient to cover 
the ground with a shagginess which rendered the clearing 
of the grounds, even near the house, very difficult. And 
this would have been no little grief even to one who was 
not a mother. For not to speak of all sorts of insects that 
generally flew during the evening round the lamp in such 
a multitude that to read and write became impossible, 
which is very tiresome in many parts of the Indies, 
there were a number of snakes and other animals in the 
underwood, not only in the ravine, but even found every 
moment in the garden, near and behind the house, or in 
the grass of the square in front. 

Standing in the fore-gallery with the face to this square, 
one’s back was to the house ; on the left was the building 
with the offices, the counting-house, and the place for 
meetings, where Havelaar had spoken that morning to the 
chiefs, and behind that was the ravine which extended to 
the Tji-Udjung. Exactly opposite the offices was the old 
mansion of the Assistant Itesidents, which was now tem- 
porarily inhabited by Madam Sloteriug ; and as one could 
reach the estate by two ways that were approached on both 
sides by the grass-fields, of course every one who came on 
the estate to go to the kitchen or stalls that were behind 
the principal building, had eitlier to pass the offices or 
Madam Slotering’s house. On one side of the principal 
building, and behind it, was the very large garden, which 
had excited the joy of Tine, because of the many flowers 



MAX HAVKLAAR. 


235 


which she found there, and above all, because there little 
Max could so often play. 

Havelaar had made his excuses to Madam Slotering for 
not having yet paid her a visit ; he would go there next 
morning, but Tine had been there and made acquaintance 
with her. I have already said that this lady was a so- 
cMlled “ native,” who spoke no other language than Malay. 
She had intimated her desire to keep her own household, 
to which Tine readily agreed. And she did not comply 
for want of hospitality, but cliiefly otit of fear that she, 
just arrived at Lebak, could not receive Madam Slotering 
so well as she considered she ought under the peculiar 
circumstances in which she was placed. True, this lady, 
who understood no Dutch, need not have apprehended any 
harm from the narratives of Max, as Tine had said ; but 
she understood that more was required than not to harm 
the Slotering family, and the scanty kitchen, in connexion 
with the intended economy, made her consider the inten- 
tion of Madam Slotering veiy wise. It is also doubtful 
whether, had the circumstances been otherwise, the inter- 
course witli a person who spoke only one language, wherein 
nothing is printed that civilizes the mind, Avould have 
conduced to mutual pleasure. Tine would have kept her 
company as much as possible, and would have spoken 
much with her about the “ kitchen” and “ puddings,” but 
this would always have been a sacrifice, and it was there- 
fore thought much better that matters had been arranged 



236 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


through Madam Slotering’s voluntary retirement in such a 
manner as left every one in perfect liberty. Yet it was 
curious that this lady had not only refused to take part in 
social dinners, but that she even made no use of the offer 
to have her food prepared in the kitchen of Havelaar’s 
house, and this reserve went a little too far, as Tine said, 
for the kitchen was large enough. 



CPTAPTEE XIV. 


[continuation of stern's composition.] 

You know,” began Havelaar, that the Dutch posses- 
sions on the west coast of Sumatra are bounded on the 
Xortli by independent districts, of which Atchin is the 
most important. It is said that a secret article in the 
treaty of 1824 restrains us from extending our frontier in 
tliat direction beyond the river Singkel. General van 
Damme, who with a faux air NapoMon wanted to extend 
his government as hir as possible, here, tlierefore, stopped 
short at the insurmountable obstacle. I must believe in 
the existence of that secret article, because otherwise it 
would surprise me that the Bajalis^ of Troomon and Ana- 
laboo, whose provinces are not without importance on 
account of their active trade in pepper, have not long ere 
now been brought under the Dutch power. You know 
how easy it is to find a pretext for war with such petty 
sovereigns, and for the annexation of their territory. To 
steal a province will always be easier than to steal a 
' Indepeiulent petty princes. 



238 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


I believe that General van Damme would even 
have taken a mill, if he had pleased, and do not under- 
stand, therefore, how he could have abstained from those 
provinces in the North if there had not existed more 
substantial reasons for so doing than right and justice. 
However this may be, he extended his conquests, not 
north but east. The provinces Mandheling and Ankola 
— [the latter was the name of the Assistant-Eesidency 
formed out of the hardly tranquillized Battah countries] 
— were not yet quite freed from Atchinese influence (for 
when once fanaticism has taken firm root in a country, 
extirpation of it is difficult), although the Atchinese were 
no longer there; but this was not enough for the Governor. 
He extended his power to the east coast; and Dutch 
functionaries and Dutch garrisons were sent to Bila and 
Pertibea, which places were, as you know, afterwards eva- 
cuated, when at last a Government Commissioner came to 
Sumatra, who thoiight this extension purposeless, and there- 
fore disapproved of it, above all because it was contrary to 
the principles of economy, on which the mother country -so 
much insisted. General van Damme asserted that this ex- 
tension would not add to the budget ; for that the new 
garrisons consisted of troops for whom money had already 
been voted, and that he had thus brought a very large 
province under the Dutch Government without incurring 

' Allusion to Le Meunier de Samsomi, by Andriena, in which he 
says of Frederick the Great of Prussia, “ On respecte un moulin, on vole 
une province 



MAX HAVELAAR. 


239 


any additional expenses. And as for diminishing the 
garrisons of other places, above all in Mandheling, he 
believed that he could place sufficient confidence in the 
fidelity and alliance of Jang di Pertoean, the most influ- 
ential chief in the Battah district. The Government 
Commissioner reluctantly concurred, upon the reiterated 
assurance of the General, that he would be personally 
responsible for the fidelity of Jang di Pertoean.^ 

“ Now the Controller, who was my predecessor in the 
province of Natal, was the son-in-law of the Assistant 
liesident of the Battah countries, who was at enmity with 
Jang di Pertoean. I afterwards heard many complaints 
brought against this Assistant liesident, but received 
them with caution, as coming from Jang di Pertoean, who 
had himself been recently accused of other offences, and on 
that account perhaps tried to make good his own defence 
by exposing the faults of his accuser. However this may 
be, the Controller of Natal took his father-in-law’s part 
against Jang di Pertoean ; and the more readily because 
this Controller was very intimate with a certain Soetan 
Salim, a cliief of Natal, who also bore the Battah chief a 
grudge. There was a feud between the families of these two 
chiefs ; the rejection of marriage proposals, jealousy of each 
other’s influence, pride on the part of Jang di Pertoean, 
who was of better family, and many more causes contributed 
to keep Natal and Mandheling at enmity with each other. 

^ Literally : He who reigns — the highest title in Sumatra. 



240 


MA.X HAVELAAK. 


“ Suddenly a report was circulated that a conspiracy had 
been discovered in Mandh(51ing, in which Jangdi Pertoean 
was concerned, and which had for its object to display 
the holy banner of revolt, and murder all the Europeans. 
The first discovery of this was of course made at Natal, 
as one is always better instructed in neighbouring pro- 
vinces how matters stand, than on the spot, because many 
who at home, from fear of compromising a chief, are careful 
not to mention a circumstance known to them, lay aside 
that fear as soon as they enter a territory where such a 
chief has no influence. This is also the reason, Verbrugge, 
why I am no stranger to the affairs of Lebak. I knew 
much of what happened there, before I ever thought I 
should be appointed hero. I was in 184G in the Krawang 
districts, and made many excursions in the Preangan, 
where, as early as 1842, 1 met with many landed proprie- 
tors in the neighbourhood of Ihiitenzorg^ and Batavia, 
and I know liow tliose landlords have always rejoiced at 
the miserable condition of the Lebak district, whose 
refugees flock to cultivate their estates. . . . 

“Now, then, the conspiracy at Mandheling, which, if 
real, would liave branded Jang di Pertoean as a traitor, 
must have been discovered in tlie same manner at Natal. 

“ According to the evidence of witnesses examined by 
the Controller of Natal, that chief, together with his 
brother, Soetan Adam, would have summoned Battah 

* Tlie residence of the Governor-Oeneral. 



MAX HAVELAAE. 


241 


chiefs to assemble in a sacred grove, where they were to 
swear not to rest before the power of the Christian dogs 
ill Mandh41ing was destroyed. Of course, he had received 
an inspiration from heaven to this effect : you know this 
qualification is never wanting on such occasions. 

Whether such was the intention of Jang di Pertoean, 
I cannot say for certain ; I read the evidence ; but you 
will see why implicit reliance was not to be placed on it. 
Tt is certain that he, with his Islam fanaticism, was quite 
capable of such a project. 

He, with the whole population of Battah, had recently 
l)een converted by i\\Q padericH^ to the true faith ; and new 
converts are generally fanatical. 

Tlie consequences of this true or supposed discovery 
was, that Jang di Pertoean was apprehended and conveyed 
to Natal, where the Controller shut him up in the fortress 
and sent him by sea, on the first opportunity, to t}ie Go- 
vernor of the west coast of Sumatra at Padang, to whom 
were submitted the documents, imwhich the heavy accu- 
sations had been set forth that justified the severity of the 
measures already taken. Jang di Pertoean had thus left 
Mandheling as a prisoner ; at Natal he was kept in con- 
finement on board the man-of-war that had transported 
him thither; he expected, therefore, — innocent or not, 
because he had been accused in legal form of high treason 
— to arrive at Padang as a prisoner ; and he must certainly 
^ Mohammedan Priests. 



242 


MAX IIAVELAAK. 


have been astoiiisheJ to learn, on landing, not only that 
lie was free, but that the General, whose carriage awaited 
him on shore, would consider it as an honour to receive 
him into his house and lodge him. Certainly never was a 
person accused of high treason more agreeably surprised. 
A short time afterwards, the Assistant Itesident of Mand- 
heling was suspended from his office because of all sorts 
of deficiencies, about which 1 do not care to express an 
opinion. Now Jang di Pertoean, who, after having been 
for some time at Padang in the Generars house, and 
treated by him with tlie utmost distinction, returned 
through Natal to Mandlidling, not with the self-esteem of 
one found innocent, but with the arrogance of a person 
who stands so high that he needs no declaration of inno- 
cence. Indeed, the matter had not been examined ; and, 
suppose that the accusations brought against him were 
thought to be false, wliy, this very suspicion ought to have 
required an examination, to jiunish the false witnesses, and 
those who had induced them to teU such falsehoods. It 
appears that the General found reasons why this examina- 
tion should not take place. The accusation against Jang 
di Pertoean was considered as “ non-avenue” and I am 
sure that the documents relating to the matter have 
never been submitted to the eyes of the Government of 
Batavia. 

“A few days after the return of Jang di Pertoean, 
I anived at Natal, to take in hand the government of that 



MAX HAVKLAAK. 


243 


district. My predecessor told me, of course, what had just 
happened in Mandhdling, and gave me the necessary infor- 
mation as to the political condition of that province in rela- 
tion to my department. It could not be taken amiss, that 
he complained much of the (in his eyes) imjust treatment 
which his father-in-law had had to undergo, and of tlie in- 
comprehensible protection which Jang di Pertoean appeared 
to receive from the General. Neither he nor I was acquainted 
at that time with the fact that the sending of Jang di 
Pertoean to Batavia was a blow aimed at the General’s 
face, and that he had good reasons, whatever they might 
he, to guarantee that chief against a charge of high treason. 
This was of so much the more importance to the General, 
because the Government Commissioner, mentioned above, 
had become in the meanwhile Governor - General, and 
probably would have recalled him from his government, 
from displeasure at the unfounded confidence in Jang di 
Pertoean, and the obstinacy founded upon that, — with which 
the General had opposed the evacuation of the East coast. 

“ ‘ But,’ said my predecessor, ‘ whatever may move the 
General to admit all the accusations against my father-in- 
law, and yet not to think worth an examination the much 

heavier accusations against Jang di Pertoean this 

matter is not yet ended ! And if at Padang, as 1 suppose, 
the sworn evidence has been destroyed, T have here some- 
thing else that cannot be destroyed.’ 

And he showed me a sentence of the Court of Justice 



244 


MAX IIAVELAAR. 


at Natal, of wliich he was president, containing the con- 
demnation of a certain Si Pamaga to the penalty of 
flogging, branding, and, I believe, twenty years"' hard 
labour, for attempting to murder the Tocankoe^ (an Indian 
functionar}^) of Natal. 

“ * Eead the proch-verbal of the session," said my prede- 
cessor, ' and then yoii may judge whether my father-in-law 
will be believed at Batavia, when he there accuses Jang di 
Pertoeaii of high treason !" 

^*1 read the documents. According to declarations of 
witnesses, and the confession of the defendant, he had been 
bribed by Si Pamaga to murder at Natal the Toeankoe, 
liis guardian Soetan, and the governing Controller. In 
order to execute this design, he had gone to the house of 
the Toeankoe, and had there commenced a conversation 
about a Sewah,^ with the servants who sat on the staircases 
of the inner-gallery, intending thereby to prolong his stay 
till he perceived the Toeankoe, who actually made his 
appearance very soon, surrounded by a number of relations 
and servants. Pamaga had fallen upon the Toeankoe 
with his ' sewah," but, from unknown circumstances, had 
not been able to execute his criminal design. The 
Toeankoe, much frightened, jumped out of the window, 
and Pamaga fled ; he hid himself in the wood, and was a 
few days afterwards taken by the Natal police. 

' Toeankoe — title of rank onhj used in Sumatra. 

^ tSewah — liidiau weapon. 



MAX HAVELAAK. 


245 


“ When the accused was asked what had moved him to 
this assault, and the intended murder of Soetan Salim and 
the Controller of l^Tatal, he replied 'that he had been 
bribed to that by Soetan Adam, in the name of his brother 
Jang di Pertoean of Mandh^ling/ 

“'Is that clear or not?’ asked my predecessor. The 
Resident’s sentence 'fiat execution’ was carried out, as 
regards the flagellation and branding, and Si Pamaga is 
now on his way through Padang, to be sent to J ava, there 
to undergo his hard labour. At the same time with him 
the documents of the proch-verbal arrive at Batavia, to 
show who the man was upon whose accusation my father- 
in-law was suspended. That sentence the General cannot 
annul, even if he would. 

“ I undertook the Government of the Natal district, and 
my predecessor left. After some time they acquainted me 
that the General would come in a war-steamer to visit 
the North, and also Natal. He arrived with a large re 
tinue at my house, and asked to see the original docu- 
ments concerning that poor man who had been so 
extremely ill-treated.” 

“ ‘ The accusers themselves,’ added he, ' deserved to be 
flogged and branded.’ ” 

" I did not understand it at all. For the causes of this 
contest about Jang di Pertoean were then still unknown to 
me, and I could therefore not conceive, cither that my 



240 


MAX HAVELAAH. 


predecessor had wilfully and knowingly condemned an 
innocent person to such heavy punishment, or that the 
General wished to protect a criminal from a just sentence. 
I was charged to have Soetan Salim and the Toeankoe 
taken prisoners. As the young Toeankoe was very much 
beloved by the population, and as we had but a small gar - 
rison in the fortress, I begged to be allowed to leave him 
at large, which was granted me ; but for Soetan Salim, the 
enemy of Jang di Pertoean, there was no pardon. The 
population was in great excitement. The Natallcrs took 
it into their heads that the General was debasing himself 
to be a tool of Mandheling hatred, and it was under these 
circumstances that I could do from time to time some- 
thing which ho deemed a brave action, above all because 
he did not give me for escort the small force that could be 
spared out of the fortress, and the detachment of mariners 
which he had brought from the ship, when I went on 
horseback to the places where there were seditious assem- 
blies. I observed, on this occasion, that the General van 
Damme took good care of liis own safety, and, therefore, 
I do not subscribe to his military renown. 

He formed a council which I might call ‘ ad hoc! The 
members were a few adjutants, other officers, the Magis- 
trate, whom he had taken from Padang, and myself. This 
council was to investigate how under my predecessor the 
proch had been conducted against Si Pamaga. I had to 
summon a number of witnesses, whose declarations were 



MAX HAVELAAK. 


247 


necessary for tlie x^urpose. The General, who of course 
presided, interrogated, and the evidence was written down 
by the Magistrate. As the latter understood but little 
Malay, and nothing at all of the Malay spoken in North 
Sumatra, it was often necessary to translate to him 
the replies of the witnesses, which the General, for the 
most part, did himself. From the sessions of this Council 
resulted documents that show very clearly that Si Paniaga 
iiever had the intention to murder any i)erson whatever ; 
that he had never seen or known Soetan Adam or Jang 
di Pertoean ; that he had mi assaulted the Toeaiikoe of 
Natal, who did not jumx) out of the window, and so on. 
Further, that the sentence against the unhappy Si Pamaga 
had been j^ronounced under the x:)ressure of the President, 
my predecessor, and of Soetan Salim, a member of th(‘. 
Council, the persons who had invented the pretended 
crime of Si Pamaga, to give to the suspended Assistant 
Resident of Mandheling a weapon for his defence, and to 
give vent to their hatred against Jang di Pertoean. 

“ The mode of investigation by the General reminded one 
of a certain whist-party of one of the Sultans of Morocco, 
who said to his partner P ‘ Play hearts, or I will cut your 
throat.’ The translations also, as he caused the officer of 
justice to write them down, left much to be desired. 

Whether my predecessor and Soetan Salim had exer- 
cised pressure on the Court of Justice to declare Si Pamaga 


The French Amhaasador. 



248 


MAX HAVELAAK. 


guilty, I do not know ; but this I know, that General van 
Damme did exercise pressure on the evidence assigned to 
prove his innocence. Without as yet knowing the ten 
dency of these proceedings, I opposed them, and went so 
far that I was obliged to refuse to sign some documents, 
and in this it was I so offended the General. You under- 
stand now the drift of the words, with which I ended the 
reply to the observations that had been made on my 
pecuniary administration, and in which I begged to be 
excused on aU benevolent considerations.” 

'' It was very brave for one of your years,” said Duclari. 

I thought it a matter of course, but it is certain that 
General van Damme was not accustomed to anything of 
the kind. I have suffered much from the consequences 
of this affair. Oh no, Verbrugge, I see what you 
mean to say, I nemr regretted it. I must even add, 
that I should not have contented myself with simply pro- 
testing against the manner in which the General examined 
the witnesses, and refusing my signature to the documents, 
if I could have guessed at that time, what I learned only 
afterwards, that all this arose from a determination fixed 
beforehand to accuse my predecessor in question. I 
thought that the General, convinced of the innocence of 
Si Pamaga, allowed himself to be carried away by a praise- 
worthy desire to save an innocent victim from the conse- 
quence of any error in justice, as far as was possible, after 
the flagellation and the brand. Though this opinion made 



MAX HAVELAAR. 


249 


me oppose falsehood, yet for that reason I did not become 
so indignant as I should have been if I had known 
that all this was not to save an innocent man, but that 
this falsehood was designed to annul the proofs that stood 
in the General’s way, at the expense of the honour and 
the welfare of my predecessor.” 

'‘And what became of your predecessor?” asked Ver- 
brugge. 

“ Happily for him, he had already gone to Java before 
the General returned to Padang. It seems that he has 
been able to account for his* conduct to the Government 
at Batavia ; at least he has remained in the service. The 
Ixcsident of Ayer-Bangie, who had issued the 'Jiat execu- 
tion’ was . . 

“ Suspended?” 

" Of course. You see that I was not so very wrong, 
when I said in my epigram that the Governor ' reigned 
over us as a suspender.’ ” 

“And what became of all these suspended functionaries ? ” 

“ Oh, there were still many more. All of them liave 
been, one after another, re established in their functions. 
Some of them have afterwards been invested with very 
considerable employments.” 

“ And Soetan Salim ? ” 

“ The General took him as a prisoner to Padang, and 
from thence he was exiled to Java. He is now at 
Tji-andjoor, in the Preangan Pegencies. In 1846 I was 



250 


MAX HAVELAAK. 


there, and paid him a visit Do you now remembej*, 

Tine, why I came to Tji-andjoor ? ” 

'' No, Max, I have quite forgotten that.” 

"'Well, who can remember everything? .... I was 
married there, gentlemen ! ” 

“ But,” asked Duclari, ‘'as you have told us several things, 
is it true that you fought so many duels at Padang ? ” 

“ Yes, I fought very often. There were many reasons 
for tliat. I told you already, that the favour of the 
Governor in such an out-of-the-way place is the rule 
with which many measure Tihcir friendliness. Most of 
them were very ill-disposed towards me, and this often 
showed itself in rudeness. 1, on the other hand, was very 
sensitive. A salutation not acknowledged, a taunt on the 
‘ folly of one who would take u}) the cudgels with the 
General,’ an allusion to my poverty, my state of starvation, 
the poor food, that seemed to be the reward of moral inde 
pendence — all tliis, you conceive, made me bitter. Many, 
above all amongst the officers, knew that the General 
liked to see people duelling, and, above all, with one so 
much in disgrace as I was. Perhaps, therefore, my sensi- 
tiveness was intentionally excited likewise I some- 

times fought for somebody else, whom I considered to be 

wronged. However this may be, duelling was the order 

of the day, and it often happened that I had two meetings 

in one morning ; there is something very attractive 

in duelling, particularly with the sabre. Yet you under 



MAX HAVELAAK. 


251 


stand that I would not do such a thing now, even if there 

were as much reason for it as in those days. Come here, 

Max ! no — don’t catch that little insect — come here, I 

say you must never catch butterflies. That little creature at 
tirst crept for a long time as a caterpillar on a tree, — that 
was no happy life. Now it has just got wings and likes 
to flutter in the air and enjoy itself, seeking food in the 
flowers and hurting nobody : — look, is it not prettier to 
see it fluttering there ?” 

So the conversation went on from duelling to butterflies, 
from the compassion of the* merciful man to his cattle to 
(iruelty to animals, from the “W Grammonf'^ to the 
French Parliament at Paris where that law was accepted 

from the republic, to many other things. At last Have- 

laar got up. He excused himself to his guests, because 
lie had business to attend to. 

When the Controller visited him the following morning 
at his office, he did not know that the new Assistant 
Resident had ridden out the day before to I\arang“Kocd- 
jaiig after the conversation in the fore-gallery, and had 
only just returned. 

I beg tlie reader to believe that Havelaar was too 
courteous to speak so much at his own table as I have 
represented in the last chapters, by which I make him 
appear to monopolize the conversation, and neglect 

^ The General de Grammont was the i)roposer of this law. It was 
accepted in the Corps L^gislatif in the year 1850. 



252 


MAX HAVELAAli. 


those duties of a host which prescribe that guests should 
take or decline the opportunity “of showing what they 
are/* I have selected a few of the many materials that 
were before me, and I could have prolonged the table-talk 
for a longer time with less difficulty than the breaking it 
off has cost me. I hope that what I have communicated 
will be sufficient to justify in part the description which I 
gave of Havelaar’s character and mind, and that the reader 
will observe with some interest the adventures that are in 
store for him and his family at Eankas-Betong. The small 
family lived on in peace. Havelaar went out very often 
during the day, and spent half the nights in his office. 
The intercourse between him and the commandant of the 
garrison was most agreeable, and also in his familiar 
conversation with the Controller no trace could be dis- 
covered of difference in rank, which often makes social 
intercourse in the Indies so stiff and disagreeable ; whilst 
the inclination of Havelaar to lend assistance where 
he could, was often to the advantage of the Eegent, 
who also was very fond of “his elder brother;** and 
finally, the amiability of Madam Havelaar contributed 
much to the agreeable intercourse between the few 
Europeans and the native chiefs. The correspondence 
about the service with the Eesident of Serang showed a 
mutual cordiality : the orders of the Eesident were given 
with courtesy, and very punctually followed. 

The household of Tine was soon in good order. After 



MAX HAVELAAR. 


253 


we had waited for it a long time, the furiutur(3 amA^ed from 
Jlatavia. Ketimons (gherkins) were pickled ; and in future 
wlien Max related anything at table, it was not for want 
of eggs for the omelet, though the manner in which the 
little family lived showed very clearly that the intended 
economy was strictly adhered to. 

Madam Slotering seldom left her house, and only now 
and then joined the Havelaar family at tea in the front 
veranda. She spoke little, and always kept a vigilant eye 
upon every one who approached her own or llavelaar’s 
house ; people got accustomed to wliat they called her 
monomania, and soon paid no more attention to it. 

All seemed to breathe peace ; for Max and Tine it was 
comparatively a trifle to submit to tlie privations which are 
inevitable at a place in the interior with but little com- 
munication. As no bread was baked in the neighbour- 
hood, they had no bread. We could have had it brought 
from Serang, but the expenses of transport were too high. 
Max knew as well as others, that there were many means 
of having bread brought to Eankas-Betong without pay- 
ment; but UNPAID LABOUR, that Indian cancer, was hor- 
rible in his eyes. So there was much at Lebak that could 
be got for nothing, through power, but could not be bought 
for a reasonable price, and in such cases Havelaar and his 
wife willingly endured privation. To be sure, they had 
undergone other privations. Had not the poor woman 
lived for months on board of an Arab vessel, without 



254 


MAX HAVELAAK. 


other bed than the deck, without other shelter from tlu‘ 
heat of the sun and the showers of the rainy season, than 
a small table, between the legs of which she had to 
squeeze herself? Had not she been obliged to satisfy 
herself in that vessel with a small allowance of dry rice 
and dirty water ? And had not she in these and many 
other circumstances always been contented if she could 
only be with her Max ? 

One circumstance, however, at Lebak caused her pain : 
—little Max could not play in the garden, because there 
were so many snakes. When she perceived this and 
complained of it to Ilavelaar, lie promised the servants a 
reward for every snake they could catch, but on the first 
day he paid so many premiums that he was obliged to 
withdraw his promise for the future ; for even in ordinary 
circumstances, and without the economy so necessary for 
him, this payment would soon have exceeded his means. 
Tt was resolved that little Max should henceforward leave 
the house no more, and that when he wished to take an 
airing, he would have to content himself with playing 
in the fore-gallery. Notwithstanding this precaution 
Tine was always anxious; and above all in the even- 
ing, as it is known that snakes often creep into the 
houses, and, seeking warmth, hide themselves in the 
bed-rooms. Snakes and suchlike vermin are to be 
found everywhere in the Indies ; but in the chief towns, 
where the population live closer together, they are of 



MAX HAVELAAl?. 


255 


course move rare than in wilder places such as Uaiikas 
llctong. If Havelaar could have decided to have his 
estate cleared of weeds, as far as the border of the ravine, 
the snakes would still from time to time have showed 
themselves in the garden, but not in such large numbers 
as was now the case. The nature of these reptiles makes 
them prefer darkness and lurking-holes to the open day- 
light, so that, if ITavelaar’s grounds had been kept clean, 
the snakes would not then, as it were, unwillingly have 
lost their way, and left the weeds of the ravine. But 
Havelaar’s grounds were not cleared, and I wish to ex- 
])lain the reason of it, as it gives another opportunity of a 
view of the abuses that reign almost everywliere in the 
Dutch Indian possessions. 

The houses of the persons intrusted with power in the 
interior are built on common lands, if one may speak oi’ 
such as existing in a country where the Government 
appropriates all. 

Enougli, these grounds do not belong to tlie ofticial 
inluibitant. For he would take care not to buy or to liire 
grounds the maintenance of which was too much for liiin. 
Now, when the grounds of the house assigned to him are 
too large to be maintained in good order, they degenerate 
in a few weeks (so luxuriant is the gi'owth of plants) 
into a wilderness. And yet, such grounds are seldom if 

ever to be seen in a bad condition yes, the traveller is 

often astonished at the beautiful park that surrounds a 



25G 


MAX IIAVKLAAH. 


Kesideut’s house. No functionary in tlie interior has a 
sufficient income to get this labour done for fair wages, 
and as a respectable apifearance of the administrator’s 
liouse is necessary, in order that the population, attaching 
so much importance to externals, may find nothing in it 
to excite contempt, the question is, how has this result 
been obtained ? 

In most places the administrators have at their disposal 
persons condemned elsewhere, but not, however, kept at 
Bantam, on account of political reasons. But even in 
places where such are located, their number, considering 
the other kinds of labour required of them, is seldom in 
proportion to the work that would be required to keep 
large grounds in good order. Other means must be found, 
and the summoning of labourers to perform feudal tasks is 
had recourse to. The Eegent or Demang who receives 
such a summons makes haste to obey it, for he knows 
very well that it will be very difficult for the adminis 
trator who abuses his power, afterwards to punish a 
native chief for a similar fault, and so the error of the one 
becomes the passport of the other. 

Yet it seems to me, that such a fault on the part of an 
administrator must not, in some cases, be judged of with 
too much severity, and, above all, not according to European 
notions. The population itself would think it strange, 
perhaps because so unwonted, if he always and in every 
case held too strictly to the stipulations that prescribed 



MAX HAVELAAR. 


257 


the number of those destined for feudal labour, as cir- 
cumstances may occur which were not foreseen when 
these stiimlations were made. 

But as soon as the limit of what is strictly lawful has 
been exceeded, it is difficult to fix the point where such 
an excess would become criminal; above all, great cir- 
cumspection is wanted, when it is known that the 
chiefs only wait for a bad example to imitate it in still 
greater excess. Tlie story of that king who ordered that 
every grain of salt which he had used at his simple dinner, 
when he travelled through the country at the head of his 
army, should be paid for, because otherwise, as he said, this 
would be a beginning of an injustice that would at last 
destroy his kingdom his name may have been Tamer- 

lane, Noer-eddien, or Genghis Khan — certainly either this 
fable, or if it is no fable, the occurrence itself, is of Asiatic 
origin ; and just as looking at sea-dikes makes you think 
of the possibility of high water, so it must be admitted 
that there exists an inclination to such abuses, in a country 
where such lessons are given. 

The persons whom llavelaar had lawfully at his dis- 
posal could only keep clear a very small part of his 
grounds, in the immediate neighbourhood of his house, 
from weeds and underwood. The rest was in a few weeks 
a wilderness. Havelaar wrote to the Eesident about the 
means of remedyiug this, either by paid labour, or by 
proposing to the Government to cause persons under 


n 



258 


MAX IIAVELAAR. 


sentence of hard lahonr, to work in the Eesidency of 
Bantam, as elsewhere. Thereupon he received a refusal, 
with the observation that he had a right to put to work 
on his grounds the persons who had been condemned by 
him, as a magistrate, to “labour on the public roads.” 
Havelaar knew this very well ; but he had never made 
use of this right, neither at Eankas-Betong, nor at 
Amboina, nor at Menado, nor at Natal. It shocked him 
to have his garden kept in good order as a fine for small 
errors, and lie had often asked himself how the Government 
could permit stipulations to remain, of a nature to tempt 
the functionary to punish small excusable offences, not in 
proportion to the offences themselves, but in proportion 
to the condition or the extension of his estate. The very 
idea, that ho who was punished, even justly, might think 
that self-interest was hidden under the sentence pro- 
nounced, made him, whore he was obliged to punish, always 
give preference to the system, otherwise very objection- 
able, of confinement. 

And it was from this cause that little Max could not 
play in the garden, and that Tine had not so much pleasure 
from the flowers as she had anticipated on the day of her 
arrival at Eankas-Betong. Of course, this and suchlike 
small misfortunes had no influence on the minds of a family 
tliat possessed so much material to procure itself a happy 
domestic life ; and it was not to be ascribed to these trifles 
when Havelaar sometimes entered with a clouded brow. 



MAX HAVELAAU. 


259 


after his return froin an excursion, Ijr after having listened 
to some one who had asked to speak to him. We have 
heard from his speech to the chiefs that he would do his 
duty, that he would oppose injustice ; and at the same time, 
I hope that the reader may have seen from the conversa- 
tions which I have communicated, that he certainly was a 
person capable of discovering and bringing to light what 
was hidden from others, or but dimly seen. It might 
therefore be supposed that not much of what happened in 
Lebak escaped his observation. We have also seen that 
many years before he had paid attention to this province 
in such a manner that, from the very first day when he 
met Verbrugge in the ‘pendoppo,’ where my history begins, 
he showed that he was no stranger in his new sphere of 
duty. By investigation on the spot, he had discovered 
much that was confimiatory of what he had previously 
suspected and, above aU, the official records had made 
him acquainted with the exceedingly miserable condition in 
which this country was. From the letters and notes of his 
predecessor, he observed that the latter had made the same 
observations. The letters to the chiefs contained reproach 
upon reproach, menace upon menace, and showed very 
clearly how this functionary would at last have said, that 
he intended to apply direct to the Government if this state 
of affairs continued.. 

When Verbrugge communicated this to Havelaar, the 
latter had replied that his predecessor would in that case 



260 


MAX IIAVELAAR. 


have acted very wrongly, as the Assistant Eesident of 
Lehak ought in no case to pass over the Eesident of Ban- 
tam ; and he had added, that this could in no case be 
justified, as it was not likely that that high functionary 
would side with extortion and tyranny. 

Sach countenance of injustice was not to be supposed, 
in the way that Havelaar meant, namely, that the Eesident 
would derive any advantage or gain from these crimes ; 
but still there was a cause which made him unwilling to 
do justice to the complaints of Havelaar’s predecessor. 
We have seen how this predecessor had often spoken to 
the Eesident about the prevailing abuses, and of how little 
use this had been. It is therefore not quite without in- 
terest to examine why he who, as the head of tlie whole 
Eesidency, was obliged to take care as much as the 
Assistant Eesident, yes, even more than he, that justice 
was done, chose rather continually to oppose it. 

When Havelaar was staying at the Eesident’s house at 
Serang, he had already spoken to him about the Lebak 
abuses, and had received for answer, — “that this was 
everywhere tlie case in a greater or less degree.” 

Now Havelaar could not deny this. Who could pre- 
tend to have seen a country where nothing wrong, hap- 
pened ? But he thought that this was no motive to toler- 
ate abuses where they were found ; above all, not when 
one is appointed to oppose them; and, moreover, that 
after all that he knew of Lebak, the question was not of 



MAX HAVELAAK. 


261 


abuses “ more or less," but of abuses on a very large scale, 
whereupon the Eesident replied, “ that it was still worse 
in Tjiringien” (likewise belonging to Bantam). 

If it is now taken for granted, as it may be, that a 
Eesident has no direct advantage in extortion, and the 
tyrannical disposal of the population, the question presents 
itself, what then induces many to tolerate such abuses, 
without acquainting the Government with them, and that 
contraiy to their oath and duty ? And he who thinks about 
this, must think it very strange indeed, that the existence 
of these abuses is so coolly acknowledged, as if it were 
a question of something out of reach or competence. I 
will try to explain the causes of this. 

To bring bad news is generally disagreeable, and it 
seems as if something of this unfavourable impression 
sticks to him whose lot it is to communicate them. Now, 
when this alone is a reason with some for denying, while 
they know better, the existence of something unfavourable, 
how much more this becomes the case, if one runs the 
risk, not only of falling into the disgrace, which seems to 
be the fate of the bringer of bad tidings, but, at the same 
time, of being regarded as the came of them. 

The Government of Dutch India likes to write home to its 
masters in the mother coimtry that all goes on satisfactorily. 
The Eesidents like to announce this to the Government. 
The Assistant Eesidents, who receive themselves from 
their Controllers nothing but favourable accounts, send 



262 


MAX IIAVELAAK. 


again, in their turn, no disagreeable tidings to the Eesi- 
dents. From all this arises in the official written accounts 
of these matters, an artificial optimism, contradictory not 
only to the truth, but also to the real opinions of these 
optimists themselves, as soon as they treat these same 
matters by word of mouth, or, what is still more curious, 
even in contreadiction to their own written reports. I can 
cite many examples of reports that rate very high the 
prosperous condition of a Ecsidency, but at the same time 
give themselves the lie, especially when accompanied by 
figures. Those examples would, — if the matter were not 
too serious on account of the final consequences, -give 
occasion for laughter and satire, and the naivety is really 
astonishing, with which, in such cases, the grossest 
untruths are maintained; though the writer exposes 
himself, a few sentences further on, to the weapons with 
which these iintruths can be rebutted. I will quote 
a single example, to which I coidd add many more. 
Among the documents which I have before me I find the 
yearly account of a Eesidency. The Eesident praises the 
flourishing state of trade, and asserts that everywhere 
the greatest prosperity and activity are to be seen. A 
little further on, he speaks of the scanty means which 
he has in his power to prevent smuggling ; but to take 
away the disagreeable impression which would be pro- 
duced on the Government at the thought that in his Eesi- 
dency many import duties are evaded, “ No,” he imme- 
diately adds, “ there is no fear of that ; little or nothing is 



MAX HAVELAAK. 


2G3 


smuggled into my Eesidency, for ... so little business is 
done here, that nobody would venture his capital in the 
trade.” 

I have read a Eeport that commenced with the words, 
“ During the past year, in this Eesidency, tranquillity has 

remoAned tranquil Such phrases certainly testify 

to a very tranquil tranquillity founded on the indulgence 
of the Government to every one who spares it disagreeable 
tidings, or, as the saying goes, “does not bother it with 
sad reports !” 

Where the population does not increase, it is ascribed 
to inexactness in the census of former years. Where the 
taxes do not rise, tliis circumstance mu.st be attributed to 
the necessity for a low taxation, in order to encourage 
agriculture, which will eventually — that is to say, when 
the writer of the Eeport shall have retired from office, — 
be sure to produce inestimable treasures. Where disturb- 
ances have taken place, that ccmld not bo concealed, tlioy 
were occasioned by a few malefactors, and need be no more 
feared for the future, as there exists a general contentment. 
Where poverty or famine has thinned the population, this 
was the consequence of scarcity, drought, rain, or some- 
thing else, NEVER OF MISGOVEKNMENT. 

The memorandum of llavelaar’s predecessor, wherein 
he ascribed the emigration of the people from the district 
of Parang-Koodjang to “ excessive abuses,” lies before me. 

' “ Tranquillity has remained tranquil,” — this is a literal rendering 
of the phrase used by many Residents. 



264 


MAX HAVELAAK. 


This notice was w^iofficial, and contained matters about 
which this functionary had to speak to the Ilesident of 
Bantam. But in vain Havelaar sought in the archives for 
a proof that his predecessor had described plainly what 
he meant by its true name in a public orfficial missive. 

In short, the official reports of the functionaries to the 
Government, and likewise the reports founded thereupon 
which are sent to the Government in the mother country, 
arc for the greater and more important part UNTRUE.^ I 
know that this accusation is serious; yet I maintain it, 
and feel myself capable of proving it. 'Whosoever is 
angry because of this undisguised utterance of my opinion, 
let him consider how many millions of money, how many 
human lives might have been spared to England, if the eyes 
of the Nation had been opened in time to the true condition 
of affairs in British India. Let him consider what a large 
debt of gratitude would have been due to the man that 
had had the courage to be the Job’s comforter before it 
was too late to repair the wrong without bloodshed.^ 

1 said that I could prove the charge. I will show, 
where it is necessary, that famine often reigned in regions 
that had been held up as models of prosperity; and where 
it was said that the population was tranquil and con- 
tented, I assert that it was often on the verge of a furious 

^ “ Max Havelaar ” has never been refuted. The laws and regula- 
tions are good. They even look so philanthropic on paper ! 

2 The English reader will bear in mind that this was written 
subsequent to the great Indian mutiny of 1857. 



MAX HAVELAAK. 


265 


outbreak. It is not my intention to give these proofs in 
this book ; yet I trust that it will not be laid aside, with- 
out the readers believing that these proofs exist. 

For the present I confine myself to another and unique 
example of the ridiculous optimism of which I have 
spoken, an example that will be understood by every one, 
whether acquainted or not with Indian affairs. 

Every Eesident sends in a monthly statement of the 
rice that has been imported into his province or exported 
elsewhere. These statements show how much of this rice 
is exported or imported. On comparing the quantity of 
rice which, according to the returns, is transported from 
Eesidencies in Java to Ecsidencies in Java, wo shaU see 
that this quantity amounts to many thousand more picoU 
(Javanese weight) than the rice that, according to the 
same returns, is imported into Eesidencies in Java from 
Eesidencies in Java.^ 

1 will not speak now of w'hat may be thought of the 
intelligence of the Government that receives and publishes 
such returns, and wiU only show the reader the tendency 
of this cheat. 

The reward per cent.^ to European and native function- 

^ A sends more to B than B receives from A ; B sends more to C 
than C receives from B, etc. 

2 The European and native functionaries are paid a certain percentage 
on products raised by the Dutch Government for the European marts. 
The Dutch government has its coffee-plantations, sugar-fields, etc. The 
European and native officials have to encourage labour in those govern- 
ment gardens, or fields, or plantations. 



266 


MAX IIAVELAAU. 


aides for products that must be sold in Europe, had caused 
such a neglect of the rice-culture,' that in some parts a 
famine has reigned that could not be juggled away from 
before the eyes of the nation. 

I have already said that orders were then given not to 
let things go so far as that again. To the many results of 
these orders belonged the statements referred to of the 
quantity of exported and imported rice, that the Govern- 
ment might be able to keep an eye on the ebb and flow of 
that produce. Exportation from a Eesidency represents 
prosperity, importation scarcity. 

On comparing and examining these statements, it ap- 
pears from them that the rice is everywhere so abundant 
that ALL THE EESIDENCIES TOGETIIEB EXPORT MORE RICE 
THAN IS IMPORTED INTO ALL THE RESIDENCIES TOGETHER. 
I repeat, that the tables alluded to only refer to rice grown 
on the island. Thus the conclusion of the matter is the 
absurd theorem : that there is more rice in Java than there 
is rice in Java} .... 

That is what I call prosperity ! ! 

I have already said that the desire to communicate no 
other than good news to the Government would be ridicu- 
lous, if the consequences of all this were not very sad. 
What amendment is to be hoped for much that is wrong, 
if there exists a preconcerted intention to bend and dis- 

^ Max Havelaar was published in 1860. Since 1860 the Dutch 
Chambers have done nothing, but declare themselves horror-struck. 



MAX HAVELAAR. 


267 


tort all in the reports to the Government? What, for 
instance, is to be expected of a population that, from its 
nature mild and submissive, has complained, year after 
year, of tyranny, when it sees the departure of one Eesi- 
dent after another, on furlough or on half-pay, or called to 
another office, without anything ever being done towards 
the redress of the grievances vmder which it bows ? Will 
not the bent bow rebound ? Will not the long suppressed 
discontent — suppressed in order to be able to deny it — be 
turned at last into fury, despair, frenzy ? Cannot you 
see the Jacquerie at the end of all this ? 

And where will the functionaries then be that succeeded 
each other for years, without ever having had the idea 
that there existed anything higher than the “ favour of 
the Government,” anything higher than the “ satisfaction 
of the Governor General ?” Where will they be then, 
those insipid report-writers, that blindfold the eyes of 
the Government by their untruths ? Shall those who be- 
fore lacked the courage to put a manly word on paper, fly 
to arms and preserve for Holland the Dutch possessions ? 
WiU they give back to Holland the treasures that will be 
required to stamp out revolt, to prevent revolution ? And 
finally, will they give back life to the thousands that have 
fallen tlir<ywgh their fault ? 

And those functionaries, those Controllers and Eesidents, 
are not the most guilty. It is the Government itself which, 
as it were, struck with incomprehensible blindness, invites. 



268 


MAX IIAVELAAR. 


encourages, and rewards the sending in of favourable re- 
ports, and above all this is the case where the question is 
that of the oppression of the population by native chiefs. 

Many persons ascribe this protection of the chiefs to 
the ignoble calculation, that as they have to exhibit pomp 
and magnificence to preserve that influence on the popu- 
lation which the Government requires, they ought to enjoy 
a much higher salary than they do now, if they were not 
to be at liberty to supply what was still wanting by un- 
lawfully disposing of the possessions and the labour of the 
people. However this may be, the Government consents 
but very unwillingly to the application of the regulations 
ostensibly for the protection of the Javanese against ex- 
tortion and plunder. For the most part it is easy to find, 
in political reasons not to be called in question, but often 
fictitious, a cause why tlm Eegent or that chief should be 
spared, and the idea is therefore generally spread through- 
out the Indies that the Government would rather dismiss 
ten Eesidents than one Eegent. These pretended political 
reasons — if they are founded on anything — are generally 
supported by false reports, because it is the interest of 
every Eesident to extol the influence of his Eegents on 
the population, so that, if afterwards there arose a ques- 
tion of excessive indulgence towards the chiefs, he might 
shelter himself behind them. 

I will not speak now of the horrible hypocrisy of the 
humane-sounding stipulations, and of the oaths that pro- 



MAX HAVELAAR. 


269 


tect the Javanese against tyranny, and beg the reader to 
remember how Havelaar, when repeating these oaths, had 
something of a disdainful look ; — and will only now point 
out the difficult situation of the man who thought himself 
bound to his duty quite independently of the repeated 
oaths. 

And for him this difficulty was greater still than it 
would have been for many others, because his heart was 
soft, and in contrast with his mind, which, the reader may 
have perceived by this time, was quite the opposite. So 
he had not only to contend with the fear of man, and the 
cares of office or advancement, but also with the duties 
which he had to fulfil as a husband and a father : he had 
to conquer an enemy in his own heart. He could not 
see suffering without suffering himself, and it would lead 
me too far, if I quoted examples, of how he always took 
even where he was injured and offended, the part of an 
adversary against himself. He had told Duclari and 
Verbrugge how in bis youth he had found something 
attractive in duelling with the sabre, which was true; 
but he did not add, how he, after having wounded his 
adversary, generally wept, and cherished his late enemy 
as a loved sister, till he was quite recovered. I could 
relate how he, at Natal, had spoken in a friendly manner 
to the man condemned to hard labour who had shot at 
him, how he caused him to be fed, and gave him more 
liberty than others, because he thought he had discovered 



270 


MAX HAVELAATt. 


that the exasperation of this condemned man was the con- 
sequence of a too severe sentence pronounced elsewhere. 
Generally, the mildness of his disposition was either denied 

or thought ridiculous denied by those who confounded 

his heart with his mind — thought ridiculous by those who 
could not understand how an intelligent man gave himself 

pains to save a fly that had stuck fast in a spider’s web 

denied again by every one — except Tine — who afterwards 
heard him scoff at those “ stupid animals,” and at “ stupid 
Nature ” that created such animals. 

But there was still another means of pulling him down 
from the pedestal whereupon his acquaintances — nolens 
volens — were compelled to place him. “ Yes, he is witty 
.... but there is inconsiderateness in his wit. lie is 
intelligent .... but he makes no good use of his intelli- 
gence. Yes, he is good-natured, but .... he plays the 
coquette with it ! ” 

For his mind and his intelligence I do not stand up, 
.... but his heart ? Poor insects, which he saved when 
he was quite alone, will you defend his heart against the 
accusation of coquetry ? 

But you fled away, and did not care about Havelaar — 
you, that could not know that he would once need your 
testimony. 

Was it coquetry of Havelaar, when at Natal he jumped 
into the estuary after a dog (the animal’s name was Sappho), 
because he feared that the young creature could not swim 



MAX HAVELAAR. 


271 


well enough to escape the sharks that are so numerous 
there ? I find such a coquetting with good-nature more 
difficult to believe than good-nature itself. 

I call you to witness that have known Havelaar — if 
you are not stiffened by the cold of winter, and dead or 
dried up and withered by the heat yonder, under the 
Equator ! — I summon you to testify of his heart, all of you 
wlio have known him ! Now, above all, I summon you 
with confidence, because you need no more seek for the 
spot where the cord must be hooked in to pull him down 
ever so little. 

Yet, however inopportunely it may appear, I will here 
insert a few lines from his pen, which will, perhaps, make 
such witnesses superfluous. Max was once far from wife 
and child. He had to leave her behind in the Indies, and 
was in Germany. With the quickness which I ascribe to 
him, but which I won’t defend if attacked, he mastered 
the language of the country where he had been for a few 
months. Here are the lines which picture his love for his 
household : — 

“ ‘ Mein Kind, da scliliigt die nennte Stimde, hor! 

Der Naclitwind sUuselt, und die Luft wird kuLl, 

Zii kiihl fiir dick vielleickt, dein Stirnchen gliikt : 

Du hast den ganzen Tag so wild gespielt 
Du bist wohl miide, koram, dein Tikar^ barret.’ 

‘ Ach Mutter, lasz inicli nock ciu Augenblick ; 

Es ist so sanft zu ruhen hier . . . und dort, 

Da drin auf meiner Matte schlaf ’ ick gleich, 


^ Tikar, a straw-mat. 



272 


MAX HAVELAAK. 


Und weisz nicht einmal was ich trUume, . . . hier 
Kann ich doch gleich dir sagen was ich triiume, 

Und fragen was mein Trauin bedeutet . . . hor, 

Was war das ?’ 

‘ ’s War ein Klaj)peT^ der da fieh’ 

‘ Thut das deni Klapper weh V 

‘ Ich glaube nicht, 

Man sagt die Frucht, der Stein hat kein Gefiihl.’ 

‘ Doch eine Blume, fiihlt, die auch nicht ? ' 

‘ Nein 

Man sagt sie fUhle nicht.’ 

* Wanim denn Mutter, 

Als gestern ich die Puhil ampat^ brach 
Hast dn gesagt : es thut dcr Blume weh ? ’ 

‘ Mein Kind, die Pukul ampat war so schon, 

Du zogst die zarten Blattchen roh cntzwei, 

Das that mir fiir die arme Blume Icid, 

Wenn gleich die Blume sclbst cs nicht gefUhlt 
Ich fUhlt’ es fUr die Blume, weil sie schon war.’ 

‘ Doch Mutter, bist du auch schon ? ’ 

‘ Ncin mein Kind, 

Ich glaube nicht.’ 

* Allein du hast Gefiihl ?’ 

‘ Ja, Menschen haben’s, . . , doch nicht alle gleich.’ 

* Und kann dir etwas weh thun ? thut dir’s weh, 
Wenn dir im Schoos so schw^er mein Kopfchen ruht ?’ 

‘ Nein, das thut mir nicht weh !’ 

‘ Und, Mutter ich, 

llab Ich Gefiihl?’ 

‘ Gewisz, erinn’re dich 
Wie du gestrauchelt einst, — an eincm Stein 
Dein Hiindcheii hast verwundet, und geweint. 

Auch weintest du als Saoedien^ dir erzahlte 
Dasz auf den Hiigeln doi*t ein Schaflein tief 
In eine Schlucht hinunter fiel und starb ; 


^ Klapper (Malay, Klappa) — cocoa-nut. 

* Pukid ampat — literally, four o’clock ; also, a flower which opens 
at four o’clock in the afternoon. 

3 Saoedien — the child’s guardian ; pron. Sudin. 



MAX IIAVELAAR. 


273 


Da hast du lang geweint, — das war GefUhl.* 

* Doch Mutter, ist GefUhl denn Schmerz V 

‘ Ja oft, 

Doch immer nicht, . . . bisweilen nicht ! Du weisst 
Wenn’s Schweaterlein dir in die Haare greift, 

Und krahend dir’s Gesichtchen nalie drUckt, 

Dann lachst du freudig, das ist auch GefUhl.’ 

* Und dann mein Schwesterlein . . . es weint so oft, 

Ist das vor Schmerz . . . hat sie denn auch GefUhl ?’ 

* Vielleicht, mein Kind, wir wissen’s aber nicht, 

Weil sie so klein es nocli nicht sagen kann.’ 

‘ Doch Mutter . . . here, was war das ? ’ 

‘ Ein Hirsch 

Der sich versp'atet im GebUsch, und jetzt 
Mit Eile heimwarts kehrt und Ruhe siicht 
Bei andren Hirachen die ihm lieb sind ’ — 

* Mutter, 

Hat soldi ein Hirsch ein Schwesterlein wie icb, 

Und eine Mutter auch V 

‘ Ich weisz nicht. Kind.’ 

‘ Das wUrde traurig seiu wenn’s nicht so ware ! 

Doch, Mutter sieh . . . was schiinmcrt dort im Straiich, 

Sieh wie es hUpft und tanzt ... ist das ein Funk ? ’ 

‘ ’s Ist eine Feuerfliege.’ 

* Darf ich ’s fan gen ?’ 

‘ Du darfst es, doch das Flieglein ist so zart, 

Du wirst gewisz es well thun und sobald 
Du ’s mit den Fingern all zu rob berulirst, 

Ist ’s Thierchen krank, und stirbt und glUnzt nicht mehr.’ 

‘ Das wurde Schade sein . . . ich fang ’es nicht, . . , 

Sieh da verschwand es, . . . neiii, es kommt hierher, . . . 
Ich fang’cs doch nicht . . . wieder fliegt es fort, 

Und freut sich dasz ich’s nicht gefangen habe, . . . 

Da fliegt es . . . hoch ... da oben . . . was ist das, 

Sind das auch Feuerflieglein dort ?* 

* Das sind 

Die Sterne.’ 

‘ Ein’, und zwei und zehn und tausend ! 
Wieviel sind denn wohl da?’ 

‘ Ich weiss es nicht ; 

S 



274 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


Der Sterne Zalil hat Niemand nocli gezlihlt ! * 

‘ Sag’ Mutter, zlihlt auch AV die Sterne niclit ?’ 

‘ Nein liehes Kind, auch Er nicht.’ 

‘ 1st das wcit 

Dort oben wo die Sterne sind?’ 

‘ Sehr weit.’ 

* Doch haben dicse Sterne auch Cleflihl ? 

Und wlirden sie, wcnn ich sie mit der Hand 
Beriihrte, gleich erkranken, und den Glanz 

Verliereii wie das Flioglein? . . . Sieh noch schwebt es . . . 

Sag, wiird’ es auch den Sternen weh thun V 

‘ Nein 

Weh thut’s den Sternen nicht, . . . doch ’s ist zii weit 
Fur deine kleiiie Hand, dureichst so hoch nicht.’ 

‘ Kami Er die Sterne fangen mit der Hand?’ 

* Auch Er nicht, das kann Niemand,’ 

‘ Das ist Schade, 

Ich glib so gern dir einen .... wenn ich grosz bin, 

Dann will ic/i so dkh Ikhen dasz ich *s kannd 

Das Kind schlief ein und traumte von Gefiihl, 

Von Sternen die es faszte mit der Hand 

Die Mutter schlief noch lange nicht ! 

Doch tniiimtc 

Auch sie, und dacht an den der fern war 

“ Cassel, Januar 1859.” 

Yes, at the risk of becoming tedious, I have inserted 
the above lines. I wish to lose no opportunity of making 
known the man who plays the principal part in my 
narrative, in order to inspire the reader with interest, as 
black clouds aft(3rwards gather over our hero's liead. 



CHAPTEE XV. 

[composed by stern.] 

Havelaar’s predecessor had good intentions, bnt seemed 
to have been in some measure afraid of the displeasure of 

liis superiors had many children and no fortune 

liad thus preferred speaking to tlie Eesident, about what 
]io called excessive abuses, than describing them plainly 
in an official report. He knew that a Eesident does not 
]ik(j to receive a written report, which remains in his 
archives, and which may be afterwards a proof that he 
liad been made acquainted in time with this or that 
wrong, whilst a verbal communication leaves him, without 
danger, the choice of paying attention to a complaint or 
not. Sucli verbal communications generally brought about 
a conversation with the Eegent, wlio, of course, denied all, 
and asked for proof. Then the men were summoned who 
had the boldness to complain, and creeping before the 
feet of the Eegent, they begged pardon. ‘‘ No, that buffalo 
had not been taken away from them without payment; 
they certainly believed that double its value would be 
paid for it. No, they had not been summoned from their 
fields to labour without payment in the Eegent’s 'sawahs;' 



276 


MAX TTAVELAAH. 


they knew very well that the Eegent would pay them 
afterwards handsomely for their labour. They had com- 
plained in a moment of groundless malice — they had been 
mad, and begged that they should be punished for such 
excessive disrespect.” . . . 

Then the Eesident knew very well that he had to think 
about this revocation of the complaint, but it gave him 
nevertheless a nice opportunity to maintain the Eegent 
in office and honour, and si^arcd himself the disagreeable 
task of troubling the Government with an unfavourable 
report. Tlie rash accusers were punished by caning, the 
Eegent triumplied, and the Eesident returned to the 
capital with the agreeable consciousness of having again 
managed so nicely. 

But what was the Assistant Eesident now to do, when 
the next day other complainers announced themselves? 
Or — and this often happened — when the same plaintiffs 
returned and revoked their revocation? Must he again 
insert this affair in Ins memoranda, to speak to the Ecsi- 
dent about it a second time, to see the same comedy played 
again, to run the same risk as before, to pass at last for a 
person who, stupid and malicious, was continually pro- 
ducing complaints that were to be rejected every time as 
unfounded. And what would become of the relation so 
necessary between the first Native chief and the first 
European functionary, when the latter seemed to give ear 
continually to false complaints against his younger brother? 



MAX HAVKLAAR, 


277 


And, above all, what became of those poor plaintiffs, after 
they had returned to their village, under the power of the 
district or village chief, whom they had accused as tlie 
instrument of the Iiegent’s arbitrariness, — what became of 
these poor men ? He who could fly, fled. 

Therefore were there many Bantam people in the neigh- 
bouring provinces. Therefore were there so many inhabit 
tants of Lebak among the rebels in the Lampong district. 
Therefore had Havelaar asked in his speech to the cliiefs : 
— ''Why is it that so many houses are empty in tlie 
villages ; and why do many prefer the shadow of the wood 
elsewhere to the coolness of the forests of Lebak ?’ 

But not every one could fly. The man whose corpse 
floats down the river in the morning, after having asked 
the foregoing evening — secretly, hesitatingly, and anxiously 
— for an audience of the Assistant Eesident, he needs flight 
no more. Perhaps it may be deemed philanthropy to 
spare him a further life, by consigning him to an imme- 
diate death. The torture was spared him that awaited 
him on his return to the village, and the stripes which are 
the punishment of every one who could for a moment 
think himself above the brute, and no inanimate piece of 
wood or stone, — the punishment for him who in a moment 
of folly had thought that there was justice in the country, 
and that the Assistant Kesident had the will and the 
power to maintain that justice. 

Was it not indeed better to prevent that man from 



278 


MAX IIAVKLAAH. 


returning the next day to that Assistant Eesident, as he had 
given notice in tlie evening ; and to smother his complaint 
in the yellow water of the Tji-berang, that would carry 
him away softly to its mouth, accustomed as that river 
was to be bearer of the brotherly presents of salutation 
from the sharks in the interior to the sharks in the sea ? 

And Havelaar was accpiainted with all this ! Does the 
reader understand what went on in his mind, when he 
considered tliat his vocation was to do justice, that he was 
responsible for that to a iiiGiiEii power than tlie power of 
a Government, that to be sure stipulated for this justice 
in its laws, but did not always like to see the applica- 
tion of it ? Do you understand how he was perplexed 
with d(jubt, not of what he had to do; but of how he 
ought to act ? He had commenced with moderation, he 
had spoken to the licgent as to an elder brother, and he 
who thinks tliat I, capti\ated with the hero of my history, 
try to extol too much the manner of his speaking, may 
hear liow once after such an interview tlie Eegent sent 
his Paikh^ to liim, to thank him for the benevolence of his 
words, and how again long afterwards this Patteh, speak- 
ing to the Controller Verbrugge, after Havelaar had 
ceased to be Assistant Eesident of Lebak, when nobody had 
anything more to hope of or fear from him, how the Patteh 
at the remembrance of these words had been touched, and 
cried, “ Never as yet any gentleman spoke like him.” 

^ A person in service of the Regent. 



MAX IIAVKLAAK. 


279 


Yet he would save, restore — not destroy. He liad sym- 
pathy with tlie Eegent ; he who knew how want of money 
oppresses, above all where it leads to humiliation and 
scorn, sought for reasons to avoid the unpleasant duty. 
The Eegent was old, and the head of a family that lived 
magnificently in neighbouring provinces, wliere much 
coffee was rcajK^d,^ and where many emoluments were 
enjoyed. Was it not grievous for him to be so far beliiiid 
his younger relatives in style of living ? 

Moreover he was fanatical, and thought whilst his 
years advanced to be able to purchas(i the welfare of his 
soul by paying for pilgrimages to Mecca, and by giving 
alms to prayer-singing idlers. 

The functionaries who had preceded llavelaar in Lebak 
had not always shown a good example, and finally, the ex- 
tensiveness of the Lebak family of the Eegent, that lived 
entirely at his cxjjense, made it very difficult for him to 
return to the right path. 

. Therefore Havelaar sought for reasons to delay all seve- 
rity, and to try once more, and still once more, what could 
be done by gentle means. 

And he went further still than kindness. With a gener- 
osity which reminded him of the faults that had made him 

’ The Dutch. Government has its coffee-gardens. If a llegciit 
encourages labour in those gar<leus, or better still, compels men and 
women to work for nothing in the government gardens, — these go- 
vernment gardens will produce much coffee, and the llegent receives 
a certain percentage, so much for every pical. 



280 


MAX HAVELAAK. 


SO poor, he continually advanced money to the Eegent, 
and that on his own responsibility, in order that neces- 
sity should not urge too strongly to rapine, and, as was 
ordinarily the case, he forgot himself so far as to offer 
to retrench in his own family to what was strictly neces- 
sary, that lie might assist the Eegent with the little that 
he could still spare of his income. 

Were it still necessary to prove the gentleness with 
which Havelaar fulfilled his difficult duty, that proof could 
be found in tlie verbal message which he intrusted to the 
Controller, when Verbrugge was going for a few days to 
Serang. Tell the Eesident that he, on hearing of the 
abuses that take jilace here, must not believe that I am 
indifferent on the subject, of which I do not immediately 
make an official report, because I would spare the Eegent, 
for whom I feel pity, from too great severity, so I will try 
first to bring him to a sense of duty by gentleness.” 

Havelaar was often out for many days together. When 
lie was at home, lie was for the most part to be found in 
the room which we represented in our plan as No. 7. 
There he was generally occupied in writing, and received 
the persons who asked an audience. He had chosen this 
spot, because there he was near his Tine, who was 
generally in the next room ; — for so cordially were they 
bound together, that Max, even when he was occupied 
with w^ork that needed attention and exertion, continually 
wanted to sec and hear her. It was often comical how he 



MAX IIAVELAAR. 


281 


suddenly spoke to her about what came up in his thouglits 
about the subjects that occupied him, and how quickly 
she, without understanding of what lie treated, knew how 
to seizQ tlic sense of his meaning, which he did not gene- 
rally explain, as if it was a matter of course, that slie 
knew what he meant. Often when he was discontented 
with his own labour, or bad news just received, he would 
jump up and say something unkind to her, who was not 
to blame for his discontent. But she liked to liear this, 
because it was another proof how Max confounded lier 
with himself. And, tlierefore, there was never a question 
of repentance of siicli apparent unkindness, or of pardon 
on the other side. This would have appeared to them as 
if somebody had asked his own pardon, because he in ill 
humour had beaten his own forehead. 

She knew him so well, that she could tell exactly when 
she had to be there to procure him a moment’s relaxation 
— exactly when he needed her advice, and not less exactly 
she knew when she had to leave him alone. 

In this rooili Havelaar was seated on a certain morning, 
when the Controller entered with a letter in liis hand just 
received. 

“This is a difficult matter,” he said, entering; “very 
difficult.” 

When I state that this letter imposed on him the duty 
of stating to Havelaar why there was a change in the 
prices of joiners’ work and labourers’ wages, the reader 



282 


MAX IIAVKLAAK. 


will think that the Controller Verbrugge saw difficulties 
rather too readily. I make haste, therefore, to add, that 
many others would have thought the answer of this 
simple question very difficult. 

A few years ago a prison liad been built at Eankas- 
Betong. Now it is generally known that the functionaries 
in tlie interior of Java understand the art of erecting build- 
ings tliat are worth thousands, witliout spending more 
tlmn so many hundreds for them. This gains them the 
reputation for capacity, and zeal for the service of the 
country. The difference between the money expended 
and the value of what they get for it is supplied by 
UNPAID LABOUR. For a few years regulations have existed 
which forbid this. It is not the question hero whether 
these regulations arc observed, nor if the Government 
itself wishes them to be fulfilhul with an exactness that 
would be burdensome on the budget of the building- 
department. It is with this as with other regulations 
that look so philanthropic on paper. 

Now many buildings had to be erected at Eaiikas- 
Eetong, and the (uigineers who were instructed to prepare 
plans of these had of course asked for information regarding 
the local rates of wages and the price of materials. Have- 
laar had charged the Controller to prepare an exact esti- 
mate of these mattei's, and had recommended him to give 
the true prices, without looking back to what had hap- 
pened before, and Yerbrugge had fulfilled this duty. But 



MAX IIAVKLAAK. 


283 


these prices did not agree with the statements made a 
few years hack. The reason of this difference was asked, 
and that was what Verbriigge deemed so very difficult. 
Ifavelaar, who know very well what was concealed behind 
this apparently simple business, replied that he would 
communicate liis ideas about this difhculty in writing; 
and I find amongst the documents before me a copy of 
tlie letter, which seems to be the consccpicnce of tliis 
promise. 

If the reader should perliaps complain of tliis deten- 
tion with a correspondence on the price of joiners’ work, 
with which lie has apparently nothing to do, I must beg 
Iiim to observe that the question hero is properly about 
(piite another matter, viz., the condition of the oflicial 
Indian economy, and that the letter which I communicate 
docs not only throw another ray of light on tlie artificial 
optimism of which 1 have spoken, but paints at the same 
time the difiiciilty with which a man like Plavelaar had 
to struggle, who would go on straightforward. 

“No. 114. 

“ liANKAs-BiCToNtj, March 15, 1850. 

“ To the Controller of Lchak. 

“ When I sent you the letter of the Director of 
“ Ihiblic Works, dated the 16th ultimo, No. 271/354, I 
“ begged you to answer the questions which that letter 
“ contained, after having consulted the llegent and duly 



284 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


" considered what I wrote in my missive of the 5th inst., 
No. 97. 

“ This missive contained some hints about what may 
“ be considered right and just with regard to the fixing of 
the prices of materials to be supplied by the people, to 
“ and at the charge of the Government. 

“ This you have done in your letter of the 8th inst., 
“ No. 6, and as T believe to the best of your knowledge, so 
“ tliat I, confiding in your local information and that of 
'' tlie Eegent, have submitted these accounts, as prepared 
“ by you, to the Eesident. 

This was followed by a missive from that chief func- 
tionary, dated the 11th inst.. No. 326, whereby informa- 
tiou was required about the cause of the difference 
between the prices given by me and those that had been 
** sent in in 1854 and 1855 (tlie two preceding years) for 
‘‘ the building of a prison. 

** I, of course, put this letter into your hands, and 
“ verbally re(piired you now to justify your statements, 
which ought to be less difficult for you, as it enabled 
“ you to appeal to the instructions given you in my letter 
of the 5th inst., and of which we spoke at length more 
“ tlian once. Up to this point all is very plain and simple. 
“ But yesterday, you entered my office with the Eesident’s 
“ letter in your hands, and began to speak of the difficulty 
“ of clearing up the questions put therein. I perceived 
“ again some reluctance to give certain things their true 



MAX HAVELAAB. 


285 


“ names, which I have told you of before, and lately in 
“ the presence of the Eesident, something which I call for 
“ shortness’ sake halfness, and against which I often 
“ warned you in a friendly way. Halfness leads to nothing. 
“ Half is no good. Half true is wntrue. For full pay- 
“ ment, for a full rank, after a distinct complete osX\\,full 
“ duty must be done. If courage is sometimes necessary 
“ to fulfil that duty, one must possess that courage. For 
“ myself, I should not have the courage to lack that 
“ courage. For apart from the discontentedness with oiie’s- 
“ self, which is a consequence of neglect of dixty or luke- 
“ warmness, the seeking for easier hyeways, the desire 
“ always and eveiywhere to escape collisions, to settle, 
“ produces indeed more care, more danger tliaii is to ho 
“ met with in a straight policy. 

“ During the course of a veiy important affair, which is 
“ now under the consideration of the Government, and in 
“ which you ought to be concerned in an official way, I 
“ left you tacitly, as it were, neutral, and alluded laugh- 
“ ingly from time to time to the circxunstance. When, 
“ for instance, I lately received your report about the 
“ causes of poverty and starvation among the population, 
“ and replied thereto : — ‘ All tliis may be tlie truth ; it is 
“ not the whole truth, nor the cardinal truth; the prin- 
“ cipal or main cause lies deeper ’ — you freely assented to 
“ this, and I made no use of my right to exact that you 
“ should make known that cardinal truth. For this in 



286 


MAX IIAVELAAK. 


‘ dulgence I had many reasons, and, amongst others, this, 
‘ that I thought it unjust to exact suddenly from you 
‘ "what many others in your place would have readily 
‘ afforded ; to force you to say farewell in such a hurry to 
‘ a course of reserve and timorousness tliat is not your 
‘ fault, but that of the training Avhich you have received. 
‘ Finally, 1 wished to give you first an example how much 
‘ simpler and easier it is to do one’s duty/wWy than only 
‘ hy halves. Hut now tliat I have had the honour of seeing 
‘ you so long under my orders, and after having continu- 
‘ ally given you occasion to make yourself acquainted 
‘ with ju'inciples, which, unless I cri', will triumph at 
' last, I should wish tliat you accepted them, that you 

■ would make your own the power which is not wanting, 

‘ but merely in disuse, to tell me to the best of your 
' knowledge what you have to say, and that you would 
' bid adieu at once and for ever to that unmanly fear of 
' telling the plain truth. 

“ 1 expect, therefore, a simple but complete report of 

■ what seems to you to be the cause of the difference in 

■ price between 1854 and 185G. 1 sincerely hope that 

■ you will not consider any phrase of this letter meant to 
hurt you, I trust that you understand me well enough, 
to know that I say neither more nor less than I mean, 
and, moreover, I give you the assurance that my obser- 
vations refer less to you than to the school in which you 
were trained for an Indian functionary. Yet this ‘ cir- 



MAX IIAVELAAB. 


287 


“ Constance attdnvMnte ’ would disappear if you, coutiuuiug 
“ longer with me, and serving the Govermneut under my 
“ orders, should go on to follow the course against which 
“ I set myself. 

“ You may have observed that I have omitted the title 
“ ‘ Eight Honourable,’^ — it annoyed me. Do the same to 
“ me, and let our honourableness, where it is necessary, 
“ come forward in another manner than by this annoying 
“ style, spoiling the use of titles.— The Assistant Eesident 
“ of Lebak, 

(Signed) “ Max IIavelaar.” 

The reply to this letter was an accusation against some 
of Havelaar’s predecessors, and proved that ho was not 
very Avrong in quoting the bad examjdes of former times 
amongst the reasons that pleaded as an excuse for the 
Eegent. 

Tn communicating this letter I have departed from the 
order of time, to make it at once obvious how little help 
Havelaar could expect from the Controller, as soon as 
quite different and more important transactions were to 
be called by their right names, when the latter, who was 
without doubt a good man, had to be addressed in this 
Avay about telling the truth, when the question Avas only to 

^ Right Honourable is by no means a good translation of the Hutch 
“ WdEdelGeatremje," It is impossible to translate this into English, 
just as “Right Worshipful” could hardly be translated into Dutch 
without becoming ridiculous. 



288 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


give information about the prices of wood, stone, lime, and 
wages, and how Havelaar had not only to struggle with 
the power of those who reaped advantage from crime, but 
likewise with the tiinorousness of those who, though con- 
demning that crime as much as he, did not mean coura- 
geously to combat it. Perhaps the reader, after having 
perused this letter, will think no more with such disdain 
of the servile submission of the Javanese, who in presence 
of his chief revokes like a coward an accusation however 
well founded it may be. For if you consider that there 
was so much cause for fear, even for the European func- 
tionary, who certainly may be deemed to be somewhat 
less exposed to vengeance, what then awaited the poor 
husbandman who, in a village far from the capital, fell 
entirely into the power of his accused oppressors ? Is it 
surprising that these poor men, afraid of the consequences 
of their boldness, endeavoured to escape or to soften those 
consequences by humble submission ? And it was not 
only the Controller Yerbrugge who did his duty with a 
shyness characteristic of neglect of duty. Tlie Djaksa 
likewise, the native chief, who fills in the council of the 
country the office of public prosecutor, preferred entering 
in the evening, unseen and without attendants, the house 
of Havelaar. He whose duty it was to prevent theft, he 
whose vocation it was to catch the sneaking thief, sneaked 
softly ill at the back door, as if he were himself a thief, 
fearing to be seized, after having firstly convinced himself 



MAX HAVELAAll. 


289 


that there was no company which could have afterwards 
betrayed him as guilty of 'performing his duty. Was it to 
be wondered at that the soul of Havelaar was very sad, 
and that Tine had to go more than ever to his room to 
console him, when she saw him sitting there with his head 
resting on his hand ? 

And yet his greatest difficulty was not in the shyness of 
those who were near him, nor in the accessory cowardice 
of those who had invoked his help. No ! quite alone, if 
necessary, he would do justice, without or with the lielp 
of others ; yes, against all, even were it against the will of 
tliose who were in want of that justice. For he knew the 
influence he had over the people, and how, if once the poor 
oppressed were summoned to repeat loudly, and bc^fore the 
tribunal, what they had whispered to him during the 
evening and the niglit in solitudc,^ — he knew how he had 
the power to work upon their minds, and how the force of 
his words would be stronger than the fear of the revenge 
of district chief or Ilegent. The fear that his 'proUg4s 
would forsake their own cause did not restrain him. 

It cost him so much to accuse this old Ilegent — that 
was the reason of his internal struggle ; but, on the other 
hand, he ought not to yield to this reluctance, because the 
whole population, besides their good right, had as much 
claim to pity. Fear for himself had no part in his doubts. 
For though he knew the unwillingness with which the 
Government generally entertains the accusation of a 

T 



299 


MAX HAVELAAK. 


Regent, and how much easier it is to take away the bread 
of the European functionary than to punish a Native 
chief, he had a special reason to believe that exactly at 
this moment other than the ordinary principles would 
predominate in the decision of such an affair. 

It is true that he would have done his duty as faithfully 
even without this opinion ; with more pleasure if he had 
deemed the danger for himself and his household greater 
than ever. We have already said how difficulty enticed 
him, how he thirsted for sacrifice ; but he thought that the 
charm of a self-sacrifice did not exist -here, and he feared 
that when at last he should have to commence a more 
serious struggle against injustice, he should come short of 
the chivalrous pleasure of having commenced this struggle 
as the weakest party. 

Yes, that was what he feared. He thought that at the 
head of the Government was a Governor-General who 
would be his ally, and it was another peculiarity of his 
character, that this opinion restrained him from severe 
measures, and would do so longer than anything else, 
because it prevented his attacking injustice at a moment 
that he thought justice stronger than ever. 

I have already said, in my attempt to describe his char- 
acter, that with all his sharpness he was ingenuous (nai/). 

I will endeavour to explain how Havelaar arrived at 
this opinion. 

Few European readers can form an exact idea of the 



MAX HAVELAAH. 


291 


lieight on which a Governor-General must stand as an in- 
dividual, not to be beneath the dignity of his office ; and 
it is therefore not too severe a judgment, if I maintain 
tliat very few, perhaps none, have been able to respond to 
so heavy a claim. Not to speak of the qualities of head 
find heart that are required, only cast an eye on the giddy 

height on which so suddenly the man is placed, who 

yesterday only a citizen to-day has power over millions 

of subjects. Ho who a short time ago was still hidden 
among his acquaintances without being more than they in 
rank or power, feels himself suddenly, for the most part 
unexpectedly, elevated above a multitude infinitely greater 
tlian the small circle in which he had been before but 
imperfectly known, and I believe that I was not wrong in 
calling this height giddy ; which, indeed, puts us in mind 
of the giddiness of one who secs suddenly a precipice 
before him, or which makes you think of the blindness 
that strikes us, if wo come suddenly from a deep darkness 
into bright light. Against such transitions, the nerves of 
vision and the brain are no match, even where they are of 
extraordinary strength. 

When also the nomination to the rank of Governor- 
General bears in itself causes of corruption, which will 
affect even one remarkable for excellent understanding 
and thorough conscientiousness, what may be expected of 
persons who already before their nomination had many 
faults ? 



292 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


And if we suppose that the King is always well in- 
formed before he signs his august name at the foot of the 
document, in which he says he is convinced of “ the good 
faith, the zeal, and the capacity ” of the newly appointed 
Governor, even if we suppose that the new Viceroy 
is zealous, faithful, and able, then the question still 
remains, whether this zeal, and above all, this capacity, 
exist with him in a measure high enough elevated above 
mediocrity to satisfy the claims of his vocation. 

For the question cannot be whether the man, who for 
the first time leaves the King’s cabinet at the Hague as 
Governor-General, possesses at that moment the capacity 
necessary for his new office, — that is impossible. By 
the declaration of confidence in his capacity can only be 
meant the belief, that he, in a quite different situation, 
on a given moment, shall know, as it were by intuition, 
what he could not have learnt at the Hague, — in other 
words, that he is a genius, a genius which suddenly 
must know and understand wliat before it neither knew 
nor understood. Such geniuses are rare, even among 
persons who are in favour Avith kings. 

As I speak of genuises, the reader will understand that 
I wisli to omit what could be said of many a Governor. 
It would likewise disgust me to insert in my book pages 
that should expose the serious design of this work to the 
suspicion of hunting after scandal. I omit, therefore, the 
peculiarities that can only reach certain persons, but as a 



MAX HAVELAAR. 


293 


general history of the malady of the situation of the 
Govemors-General, I believe that I can give: — First 
fcriod — ^Dizziness, Incense-drunkenness, Self-conceit, 
Immoderate self-confidence. Disdain of others, above 
all of persons who have been long in India. Second 
period — Fatigue, Fear, Dejection, Inclination to Sleep 
AND Eest, Immoderate confidence in the Council of 
India, Home-sickness and desire for a Dutch country- 
seat. 

Between these two periods, and as a sort of transition, 
perhaps as cause of this transition, there is Dysentery. 

I trust that many persons in India will thank me for 
this diagnosis. 

The application is very useful, for it may be accepted 
as very certain, that the patient, who through oA’^er-exer- 
tion in the first period, would choke at a gnat, would 
later, after the dysentery, swallow without difiicidty a 
camel ; — or, to speak more plainly, that a functionary 
who “ accepts presents, not with the intention of enriching 
himself,” — for instance a bundle of pisang worth a few 
pence, — would, in the first period of the malady, be driven 
away with scorn and disgTace; but if that official has 
patience enough to wait for the second period, he may seize 
very calmly, and without any fear of punishment, the garden 
where the pisang grew, with the adjoining gardens, and 
the houses round, and what there may be in those houses, 
and other things . ... ad libitum. 



294 


MAX HAVELAAK. 


Every one may take advantage of this pathological 
philosophical observation, and keep secret my advice to 
prevent too much competition. . . . 

A curse on it, that indignation and grief are so often 
clotlied in the rags of satire ! A curse on it, that a tear, 
to bo understood, must be accompanied with a sneer ! 

Or is it the faidt of my inexperience, that I' seek in 
vain for words to name the depth of the wound that 
cankers in our Indian Government, without borrowing 
the style of Figaro or Punch? Style, . . . Yes! There 
are documents before me, in which there is style ; stylo 
that showed that there was a man in the neighbourhood ; 
a man, to whom it would have been worth the trouble 
to give a helping hand ! And of what use was this style 
to poor Havelaar? He did not translate his tears into 
grins, he did not scoff, he did not endeavour to touch by 
a medley of colours or insipid farces ; of what use 

was it to him ? 

If I could write like him, I should write otherwise 
than he. 

Style ? . . . Did you hear how ho spoke to the chiefs i 
And of what use was it to him ? 

If I could speak like him, I should speak otherwise 
than he. 

Away with conscientious language, away with consider- 
ateness, straightforwardness, plainness, simplicity, feeling ; 
away with all that puts you in remembrance of Horace’s 



MAX IIAVEIAAH. 


295 


" Jiishim et tenacem,;” trumpets here, and the shari) 
rattle of kettledrums, whizzing of rockets, screeching of 
tuneless strings, here and there a true word sneaking in 
as contraband, under cover of so much drumming and so 
much trumpeting ! Style ? . . . He had style ! He had 
too much soul to drown his thoughts in, “ I have the 
lionour to be,” and the "Eight Honourable,” and the 
“respectfully giving in considerations,” that was the 
luxury of the small world in which he moved. When he 
wrote, something impressed you in the reading of it, wliich 
made you understand that there were clouds accompany- 
ing this thunderstorm, and that you did not hear the 
rattling of tin thunderstorm as in a theatre. When he 
sffnick fire from ideas, the heat of his fire was felt by all 
but born clerks, or Governor-Generals, or the writer of 
that most disgusting report about " tranqxdl tranqxt/illity!’ 

And what Avas the use of it to him ? ... If I want to 
bo heard, and, above all, understood — must I then write 
otlierwise than he ? But how, then ? 

Do you see, reader ! I look for an answer to this *‘how,” 
and therefore my book is such a medley : it is a pattern- 
card, make your choice; afterwards I will give you yellow 
or blue or red, as you please. 

Havelaar had already so often observed the Governor’s 
malady in so many sufferers, and often in anima vili, 
for there are analogical Eesidents’, Controllers’, Clerks’ 
maladies, that are in proportion to the first as the measles 



296 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


to the small-pox, and finally, he himself had suffered from 
this malady ; he had already so often observed this, that 
he knew the symptoms very well. He had remarked that 
the present Governor-GeneraH had been less dizzy at tlie 
commencement of the malady than most others, and he 
concluded from this that the rest of the malady would 
likewise take another course. Therefore he feared to be 
the strongest, if at last he should have to come forward 
as the champion of the rights of the inhabitants of 
Lebak.^ 

' Duymaer van Twist. 

Ho would BEGIN the cami)aign as the weakest, and yet at last be 
the strongest. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

[composed by STEEN.] 

IIavelaar received a letter from the Regent of Tjanjor, 
wherein the latter communicated to him that he wished 
to pay a visit to his uncle the Regent of Lebak. This 
was very disagreeable news for him. lie knew how the 
cliiefs in the Preangan Regencies were accustomed to dis- 
play much magnificence, and how tlie Regent of Tjanjor 
could not undertake sucli a journey without a train of 
many hundreds, all of whom must be lodged and fed, as 
also their horses. He would gladly have prevented this 
visit; but he thought in vain of the means of doing so, 
without offending the Regent of Rankas-Betong ; as the 
latter was very proud and would have felt d(3eply offended 
if his comparative poverty had been mentioned as a 
iiKjtive for not visiting him. And if this visit could not 
be avoided, it would inevitably give occasion to aggravate 
the oppression of the people. 

It is to be doubted if Ilavelaar’s speech had made a 
lasting impression on the chiefs ; with many this was cer- 



298 


MAX IIAVELAAK. 


taiiily not the case ; but it is certain that, in all the vil- 
lages, the report had spread, that the gentleman who had 
j)ower at Eankas-Betong would do justice, and if his 
words were powerless to prevent crime, they had at least 
given the victims the courage to complain, however hesi 
tatingly and secretly. 

In the evening they crept through the ravine, and when 
Tine was sitting in her room, she was frightened by an 
unexpected noise, and saw before the open windows dark 
forms tliat sneaked along with a shy step. But very soon 
she started no more, for she knew what it meant when 
these forms wandered like so many spectres round the 
house, and asked protection of her Max. Then she beck- 
oned him, and he got up to call in the complainants. 
Most of them came from the district of Parang-Koodjang, 
wlierc one of the chiefs was a son-in-law of the Begent ; 
and though this chief did not omit to take his part of the 
extortion, yet it was no secret that he generally robbed in 
name of the llegciit, and for his benefit. It was affecting 
to sec how these poor men relied upon the chivalry of 
Ilavclaar, tliat he would not summon them to repeat the 
following day openly what they told him in his room. 
This would have caused the ill-treatment of them all, and 
the death of many. Havelaar made notes of what they said, 
and after that ordered the jfiaintififs to return to their vil- 
lage. lie promised that justice should be done, provided 
they made no opposition, and did not emigrate, as was 



MAX HAVELAAR. 


290 


tlie intention of many. Generally, he was shortly after- 
wards at the place where the injustice happened, yes, 
he had often been there already, and had for the most part 
examined into the affair before the plaintiff himself had 
returned to his dwelling. In this manner he visited in 
this extensive department, villages that were eighty miles 
distant from Eankas-Betong, without the Ecgent or even 
the Controller Verbrugge knowing that he was absent 
from the capital. Ilis object in so doing was to shield 
the complainants from the danger of revenge, and at the 
same time to spare the Ecgent the shame of a public in- 
tpury, which with Havelaar would not have ended in a 
revocation of the complaint. He still hoped that the 
chiefs would turn back on the dangerous road which they 
liad already walked so long ; and he would in that case 
have been contented merely to claim indemnification for 
the poor sufferers. 

But on every occasion of his speaking to the Eegent, 
it was evident to him that all promises of amendment 
were vain ; and he was deeply pained at the ill-success of 
his endeavours. 

Wo shall now leave him for a time in his disaj^point- 
ment and the difficult work he had undertaken, to relate 
to the reader the history of the Javanese Haidjah in the 
dessah Badoer. I extract from llavelaar’s notes the naiiui 
of this village and that of the Javanese concerned. It is a 



300 


MAX IIAVELAAll. 


case of extortion and plunder; and lest my history should 
be thought fictitious, I give the assurance that I can fur- 
nish the names of the thirty-two persons in the district of 
Parang-Koodjang alone, from whom in the course of on& 
month thirty-six buffaloes had been stolen for the use of 
the Itegent; or, still better, I can give the names of 
thirty-two persons in that district, who in one month 
dared to complain, and whose complaints, having been 
examined by Havelaar, were found to be true.^ 

There are five such districts in the liesidency of Lebak. 
Now if one chooses to believe that the number of stolen 
buffaloes was less in those parts that had not the honour 
of being governed by the son-in-law of the Eegent, I will 
grant that ; though the question still remains, whether the 
rapacity of other chiefs was not founded on as sure 
ground as that of near relationship? For instance, the 
district chief of Tjilangkahan on the south coast could in 
default of a fatlicr-in law, of whom one was much afraid, 
rely upon the difficulty with which the poor in their 
complaints had to contend, that, namely, of walking forty 
or sixty miles before hiding themselves during the even- 
ing in the ravine near llavelaaFs house. And if we ob- 
serve the fact that many started never to reach that house, 
that many did not even leave their village, frightened as 
they were by their own experience or by the sight of the 

' This statement the author published in 1861 at Amsterdam. 
{Minnehrieven, by Multatuli.) 



MAX IIAVELAAK. 


301 


fate which overtook other plaintiffs, then I believe that 
we should be wrong in thinking that the multiplication 
by five of the number of buffaloes stolen out of one dis- 
trict would be too high an estimate of the number of cattle 
stolen every month in the five districts, to provide for the 
wants of the Eegent of Lebak’s court. 

And it was not buffaloes alone; nor was buffalo-robbing 
the main thing. A somewhat less degree of shamelessness 
is required — above all in India, where statute-labour is 
still lawful — to summon the people unlawfully for unpaid 
labour, than is necessary to take aw^ay property. It is 
easier to make the population believe that the Government 
wants labour without wishing to pay for it, than that it 
should claim the poor man's buffalo for nothing; and even 
if the timorous Javanese dared to investigate whether the 
statute-labour required of him agreed with the regulations 
on the subject, even then it would be impossible to suc- 
ceed, as the one has nothing to do with the other, and he 
cannot therefore calculate whether the fixed number of 
persons has not been exceeded ten or fifty times. Where 
also the most dangerous, the most easily discovered abuse, 
is executed with such boldness, what may not then be 
thought of the abuses that are much easier of execution, and 
less liable to discovery ? I said that I was going to relate 
the history of the Javanese Sai’djah; yet I am compelled 
first to make one of those digressions which are so difficult 
to avoid when describing situations that are quite strange 



302 


MAX HAVELAAll. 


to tho reader. I will state at the same time the 
that make it so difficult for those who have not been in 
India to judge of Indian affairs. 

I have repeatedly spoken of the people as Javanese, and 
however natural this nomenclature may appear to the 
European reader, it must have sounded wrong to the ears 
of any one acquainted with Java. The Western Resi- 
dencies of Bantam, Batavia, Preangan, Krawand, and a 
part of Cheribon, — all together called Soondah-countries/ 
— are not considered as belonging to Java proper; and not 
to speak now of the foreigners that came from over the 
sea into these regions, the aboriginal population is quite 
different from that of the middle of Java, or that of the 
so-called east corner. Language, character of the people, 
manners, dress, change so much as you go eastward, that, 
indeed, there is more difference between the Soondanese 
and the Javanese proper, than between the English and 
the Dutch. Such differences arc often the cause of dis- 
putes in judging of Indian affairs. If wo observe that 
Java alone is so sharply divided into two distinct parts, 
without marking the many subdivisions of these, we may 
calculate how great the difference must be between popu- 
lations that live further from each other, and are separated 
by the sea. He whose knowledge of Dutch India is 
confined to Java, can no more form a just idea of the 
Malay, the Amboynese, the Battah, the Alfoer, the 
^ Soondah or Sundali. 



MAX HAVELAAK. 


303 


Timorese, the Dayak, or the native of Macassar, than he 
wlio never left Europe ; and for a person who has had 
the opportunity of observing the difference between these 
populations, it is indeed often amusing to hear the con- 
versations, and afflicting to hear the speeches, of persons 
who get their knowledge of Indian affairs at Batavia or 
at Buitenzorg. I have often wondered at the courage 
with which, for instance, a late Governor- General endea- 
voured, in the Eepresentative Chambers, to give weiglit 
to his words, by a pretended claim to local knowledge 
and experience. I esteem very highly the knowledge 
acquired by profound study in the library, and have often 
been astonished at the extent of the knowledge of Indian 
afhiirs which some have displayed without having ever 
trod Indian ground, and when a late Governor-General 
gives proofs of having acquired such knowledge in this 
manner, we feel for him the respect which is the legi- 
timate reward of the conscientious and fruitful labour of 
many years. This respect would be still greater for him, 
than for the scholar who had fewer difficulties to conquer, 
because he at a far distance, without inspections, ran a 
less risk of falling into the errors which are the conse- 
quence of a defective view, as was the lot of the late 
Governor-General.^ 

^ Because usually the Govemors-General have never before been in 
India. The late Govern or-Gencral, for instance, when he was ap- 
pointed by the* king, had never been in India, or connected in any- 
thing with Indian matters. 



.304 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


I said that I was surprised at the confidence whicli 
some have shown in the treatment of Indian affairs. For 
they know that tlieir words are heard by others than 
those who think it enough to have passed a few years at 
Buitenzorg, to know India ; that these words are likewise 
read by those persons in India itself, who were the 
witnesses of their inexperience, and who, as much as T, 
arc astonished at the boldness with which a man, who, 
only a short time ago, tried to hide tliis incapacity behind 
the high rank wliich the King had given him, speaks now 
all at once as if he really possessed a knowledge of the 
affairs of which ho treats. 

Again and again, therefore, you hear complaints of 
incompetent interference, again and again this or that 
system is opposed in the Eepresentative Chambers by 
denying the competency of him who represents such a 
system, and it would x)erhaps not be inopportune to make 
an exact inquiry into the qualities which make a person 
competent to judge of competency. Generally, the touch- 
stone of an important question is not the matter of which 
it treats, but the value which is ascribed to the opinion of 
the person who speaks of it ; and as he is often one who 
is considered to be qualified above all others, one who 
had, in India, such a high position,’' the consequence of 
it is, that the results of the voting bear generally the 
colour of the errors that seem to stick to “ these important 
positions.” If this is the case where the influence of such 



MAX IlAVELAu\.R. 


303 


a person is only exercised by a member of the Representa- 
tive Chambers, how great then will be the inclination to 
judge wrongly if such influence is accompanied by the 
confidence of the King, who placed this functionary at the 
liead of the ministry of the colonies ? It is a peculiar 
phenomenon (perhaps owing its origin to a sort of dulness, 
which shuns the trouble of judging for oui'selves), how 
easily one gives his confidence to 2iersons who know ho\v 
to give themselves the ajjjjeai’ance of more knowledge, 
when this knowledge has been drawn from a foreign 
source. The reason jierhaps is, that self-love is less hurt 
by the acknowledgment of such an ascendency, than 
would be the case if one could have rccours(; to the same 
c.xpedients when anything like emulation shoiild arise. It 
is easy for the rejireseiitative of the 2)eo2»le to give ui) his 
o]iinioii, iis soon as it is combated by a 2)erson who may 
be deemed to pass a more accurate judgment than he, and 
this accuracy need not be ascribed to 2>ersoual su2)oriority, 
confession of which would be more difficult, but only to 
the jiarticular circuui, stances wherein such an oiijionent 
has been. And not to sjieak of those who hav'c filial 
high offices in India, it is indeed strange how' often value 
is ascribed to the ojiinioii of jiorsons who really possess 
nothing to justify the credit given them, than the remem- 
brance of a residence of so many years in those regions, 
and this is so much the more strange, because they, wlio 
attach inniortance to such a source of information, would 


u 



30(i 


MAX HAVKLAAR. 


not readily believe all that would be told them, for instance, 
about political economy in Holland, by a person who could 
show that he had lived forty or fifty years in Holland. 
There are persons who have lived more than thirty years 
in Dutch India without ever coming in contact with 
either the population or the native chiefs ; and it is sad 
that the Council of India is often totally, or for a great 
part, composed of such persons, — that the means have even 
been found to make the King sign the appointment, as 
(lovenior-Ceneral, of a person who belonged to this class. 

When I said that this supposed capacity of a newly 
appointed Governor-General might be considered as im 
plying that he was held to be a genius, I did not mean to 
recommend the appointment of geniuses. Besides the 
difficulty of having this important employment continually 
vacant, another reason pleads against this. A genius 
would not ■ be able to work under a Minister of the 
colonies, and would therefore be useless, as geuiuse.s 
generally are. 

It would, perhaps, be desirable that the main faults 
given by me in the form of a diagnosis should get the 
attention of those who arc called upon to the choice of a 
new Governor. Taking it for granted that all the persons 
considered eligible are conscientious, and in the possession 
of a faculty of comprehension sufficient to enable them to 
learn a little of what they will have to know, I think it a 
main thing that the avoidance may be expected of them 



MAX HAVELAAR. 


307 


of that presumptuous self-conceit in the beginning, and, 
above all, of that apathetic sluggishness in the last years 
of their administration. 1 have already said that Have- 
]aar, in his difficult duty, tlioiight he could rely upon the 
help of the Governor-General; and I added that this 
o]iiiiioii was naif. That Governor-General was expecting 
liis successor .... his rest in Holland was near. We 
shall see what this sluggishness brought upon Havelaar, 
and upon the Javanese Saidjah, whose monotonous his 
tory — one amongst many — I am now about to relate. 

Yes, monotonous ” it will be! IMonotonous as the 
history of the activity of the ant, which had to carry up 
its contribution for the winter store over the clod — the 
niountain — which blocks up the way to the storehouse. 
Again and again it falls back with its burden, to try again 
to put its feet on that little stone high there on the rock 
at the top of the mountain. But between it and this top 
there is an abyss, a depth which a thousand ants could not 

fill this must be passed. Therefore the ant, that has 

scarcely the strength to drag its burden on even ground — 
a burden many times heavier than its own body — that 
can hardly lift it up and balance itself on an unsteady 
footing, has to preserve its ecpiilibriuin — when it climbs 
with its burden between the fore-legs, it has to sling it 
round to the side to make it come down on the point 
which stretches out on the rock, — it staggers, totters, is 
frigliteried, sinks down, endeavours to take hold of the 



308 


MAX HAVELAAK. 


half rooted-up trunk of a tree — of a blade of grass — whicli, 
with its top, points to the depth — it loses the fulcrum 
which it sought for, the tree gives way, tlie blade of giuss 
yields under its weight, and the ant falls back into the 
depth with its burden. Then it is still for a moment, 
which is long in the life of an ant. Tt is stunned by the 
pain of its fall — or does it yield to grief that so much 
exertion was in vain ? No, its courage does not forsake 
it. Again it seizes tlie burden, and again drags it aloft, 
again soon to fall into the depth. So monotonous is my 
tale. But I shall not speak of ants, whose joy or sorrow 
escapes our observation through the didness of our organs ; 
I shall speak of men who move in the way same as we do. 
It is true ho who shuns emotion, and would fain avoid 
compassion, will say that those men are yellow or brown 
— many call them black, — and for them the difference of 
colour is reason enough for turning the eye from their 
misery, or at lea.st for looking down on it without emotion. 
IMy narrative is therefore only addressed to those who are 
capable of the ditlicult faith, that hearts throb under that 
dark epidermis, and that he who is blessed with a white 
skin, and the civilisation thereunto belonging — ^generosity, 
mei'cantile knowledge, and religion, virtue, etc. — might use 
these qualities of the white man better than has yet been 
experienced by those less blessed in colour and mental 
capacity. 

Yet my confidence in your sympathy wdth the Javanese 



MAX IIAVELAAH. 


309 


does not go so far as to make me imagine when I tell you 
how the last buffalo has been carried off from the enclosure, 
in broad daylight, without fear, under protection of Dutch 
j)ower, wlien I cause the stolen cattle to be followed by 
the owner and his weeping children, and make him sit 
down upon the steps of the robber’s house, speechless and 
senseless, absorbed in sorrow, to be chased away with out 

rage and disdain, menaced with strij)es and prison 

See ! \ neitlier claim nor exx)ect that you will be moved 
by this in the same manner as you would be if I sketched 
the destiny of a Dutch ])easant whose cow had been taken 
away. 1 ask no tear for the tears that flow on such dark 
faces, nor nobhi indignation when 1 shall speak of the 
despair of the suffered*. Neitlier do I expect that you will 
rise and go with my book in your hand to the King, say- 
ing : “ Look here, O King, that happens in your empire, 
ill your beautiful empire of Tiisulinde 

No, no ; all this 1 do not expect. The excess of misery 
at home overmasters your feeling of sympathy for what is 
far off. Was there not yesterday but little business going 
on at the Exchange, and does not the glutting of the coffee 
market threaten a reduction in price ? 


“ Don’t write such nonsense to your papa, Stern,” 1 
said, and perhaps a little passionately, for 1 can’t bear 
untruth ; that has always been a fixed principle with me. 



310 


MAX HAVELAAK. 


I wrote that evening to old Mr. Stern, telling him to 
beware of false reports. 

The reader understands what I have again suffered in 
listening to the last chapters. Was I not right when I 
said that Shawlman had made them all mad with his 
parcel ? Would you recognise in this writing business of 

Stem and Fred too lielps, that is certain young 

men tliat were educated in a respectable house ? 

What foolish sallies are these against a sickness which 
rcweals itself in a desire for a country seat ? Is that aimed 
at me ? Am not I allowed to go to Driebergen as soon as 
Fred is a broker ? And who speaks of dysentery in the 
company of mothers and daughters ? It is a fixed prin- 
ciple with me always to remain quiet, for I think it useful 
in business ; but I must confess, that it has often cost me 
a great deal to listen to all the nonsense that Stern reads. 
What does he mean ? What must be the end of all this ? 
When sliall we liear anytliing substantial ? Of what in- 
terest is it for me whether Havelaar keeps liis garden clean 
or not, and whether those people enter in front of the 
Iiouse or at the back? At Busselinck and Waterman’s 
one has to go through a small entrance, near an oil ware- 
house, where it is always abominably dirty. ^And then 

those tiresome buffaloes. Why do they want buffaloes, 
those black fellows ?..../ never had a buffalo, and yet 
1 am contented ; — there are men who are always com- 
plaining. And as regards that scoffing at forced labour, 1 



MAX HAVELAAK. 


311 


perceive that he had not heard that sermon of Domini 
Wawelaar’s, otherwise he would know how useful labour 
is in the extension of the kingdom of God. It is true, he 
is a Lutheran 

To be sure, if I could have known how he would write 
the book, which was to be so important to all coffee- 
brokers — and others — I w^ould rather have done it myself. 
But he is supported by the Kosemeyers, who trade in 
sugar, and this makes him so bold. I said plainly, for 1 
am honest in those things, that we can dispense with the 
Jiistory of that man Saidjah ; but just then, all at once, 
Louise Eosemeyer began to cry. It appears that Stem 
liad told her that there would be something about love in 
it, and girls are mad after that. Yet this would not have 
made me yield, if the Eosemeyers had not told me tliat 
they w^ould like to be acquainted with Stern’s father. 
Of course, through the father they will arrive at the 
uncle, who trades in sugar. If I am now too much for 
common-sense, and against Stern junior, 1 get the appear- 
ance as if I would keep them away from him, and that is 
not at all the case, /or they trade in sugar. 

I don’t understand what Stern means by what he writes. 
There are always discontented people, and does it become 

him who enjoys so much good in Holland only this 

week my wife gave him camomile tea to scoff at the 

Government ? Does he mean to excite public discontent ? 
Does he want to become Governor-General ? He is self- 



312 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


conceited enough for that. I told him the other day that 
he spoke very bad Dutcli. “ Oh, that is nothing,” said he, 
“ it seems that a (governor is very seldom sent over who 
understands the language of the country.” 

What shall I do with such a self-conceited fellow ? lie 
has not th(3 least respect for my experience. When I told 
him this week that I had been a broker for seventeen 
years, he cited Busseliiick and Waterman, who have been 
brokers for eighteen years, 'Sand,” said he, "they have 
one year’s more experience.” Tluis he caught me, for 1 
must confess, because I like truth, that Busselinck and 
Waterman have little knowledge of business, and that 
they are old women and sneaks. Mary too is led astray. 

Only this week it was her turn to read at breakfast, 

we were about to have the history of Lot when she 

suddenly stopped, and refused to proceed. My wife, who 
likes religion as much as T do, tried gently to persuade her 
to obedience, because it does not become a modest girl to 
be £0 obstinate. All in vain. Thereupon I, as a father, 
was obliged to scold her with much severity, because she 
spoiled, by her obstinacy, the comfort of the breakfast, 
which always has a bad influence on the whole day. 
But nothing would help, and she went so far as to say, 
that she would rather be beaten till she was dead than 
proceed with reading. 1 have punished her with three 
days* confinement to her room on coffee and bread; 
1 hope that it will do her good. To make this punish- 



MAX HAVELAAR, 


313 


ijient severe, at the same time a moral lesson, I have 
urdercd her to copy the chapter which she would not 
read ten times, and I have treated her with this severity 
above all, because I have perceived that she has, during 
tlie last few days — whether from Stern or not I do not 
know — taken up ideas which appear to me to be danger- 
ous to morality, to which my wife and I are so much at- 
tached. I heard her sing, for instance, a French song — by 
l^erangcr, I believe — in which the poet pities a i)oor old 
beggar, who in her youth sung at a theatre, and yester- 
day at breakfast she had no stays on JVfary, I mean 

— tliat was really not respectable. 

I have likewise to confess that Fred brought home 
little good from the 2 >i'^y^i’"^^^Getiiig. I had been 
much j)leased witli his sitting so quietly in church. 
He did not move, and always looked at tlie 2 >ulpit, but 
afterwards I heard that Betsy Kosemeyer was sitting 
near it. 1 said nothing about it, for one must not be too 
severe towards young ]3eople, and the Kosemeyers are a 
respectable firm. They have given their eldest daughter, 
who married Bruggemaii the druggist, something very 
nice, and therefore I believe that this will keep Fred away 
from the Wester Market, which is very gratifying to me, 
because I am so attached to morality. 

But I am grieved to see that this docs not 2)revent 
Fred from hardening his heart, like Pharaoh, who was less 
guilty, because he had no fatlier to show him continually 



314 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


the right path, for the Scriptures do not speak of old 
Pharaoh. Domin(5 Wawelaar complains of his conceit- — 

I mean Fred’s at catechism, and he seems — again from 

Shawlmiin’s parcel, — to have derived this self-conceit, 
which drives the conscientious Wawelaar almost mad. 
It is touching how the worthy man, who often lunches 
with u.s, endeavours to work on Fred’s feelings, and how 
the scamp is always I’oady with new questions, which 
show the perversity of liis heart. It all comes from that 
accursed book of Shawlman’s. With tears of emotion on 
liis cheeks, the zealous servant of the CJospel endeavours 
to move him to turn away the eyes from the wisdom of 
men, to ho introduced into the mysteries of the wisdom of 
Clod. With gentleness and meekness he prays him not to 
throw away the bread of eternal life, and to fall while 
acting thus into the clutches of Satan, who, with Ids 
angels, inhabits the fire prepared for him to all eternit)'. 

“ Oh,” .said he yest(n’day ^Wawelaar, I mean “O my 

young friend, open now eyes and ears, and hear and see 
what the Lord gives you to see and hear by my mouth. Pay 
attention to the evidences of the saints who have died for 
the true faith. Look at Stephen, sinking down under the 
stones that crush him, see how he still looks to heaven, 
and how he ceases not to sing psalms , . . 

“ I would rather have thrown stones in return,” said Fred 
in reply. header ! what shall 1 do with this fellow ? 

A moment afterwards Wawelaar commenced again ; for 



MAX IIAVELAA15. 


315 


lifi is ail ardent servant, and sticks to his work. “ Oh,” 
said he, "young friend .... (the preamble was as above), 
can you remain insensible when you think of what shall 
t)ccome of you when once you are counted {imongst the 
<foats on the left hand . . . .” 

r> 

Thereupon the rogue burst out laughing 1 mean 

Fred and Mary laughed too. I even thought tliat 1 

]>erceived something like a laugh on my wife’s face. But 
tlien I helped Wawclaar: I punished Fred with a fine out 
of his money-box to the missionary society. 

But all this touches me deeply. And could any one 
take pleasure in hearing stories about buffaloes and the 
Javanes(i with such grievances of Ids own? What is a 
buffalo to the salvation of Fred ? What do 1 care about 
the affairs of those people away there, when I have to fear 
tliat Fred will .spoil my business by his unbelief, and that 
he will never become a good broker ? For W. himself 
has said, that God so directs all things that orthodoxy 
leads to wealth ! “ Look only,” he said, “ is there not 

much wealth in Holland ? Tlrat is because of the Faith. 
Is there not in France every day mrrrder and lioniicide ? 
That is because there are Roman Catholics there. Are 
not the Javanese poor ? Tln^y are Pagans. The more the 
Hutch have to do with tlie Javanese, the more wealth will 
be here, and the more poverty then?.” 

1 am astonished at Wawelaar’s penetration. For it is 
the truth, that I, who am exact in religion, see that my' 



316 


MAX IIAVELAAR. 


business increases every year, and Busselinck and Water- 
man, who do not care about God or the Commandments, 
will remain bunglers as long as they live. The Eose- 
meyers, too, who trade in sugar, and have a Eoman Catholic 
maid servant, had a short time ago to accept 27 per cent, 
out of the estate of a Jew who became bankrupt. The 
more 1 reflect, the fui'ther I advance in tracing the uii 
searchable ways of God. Lately it ai)peared that tliirty 
millions had been gained on the' sale of ])roducts furnished 
by tlie I Rigans, and in this is not included what I have 
gained thereby, and others who live by this business. Is 
not that as if the Lord said — "Here you have thirty 
millions as a reward for your faith?” Is not that the 
finger of God, who caus(\s the wicked one to labour to 
])rcserve the righteous one ? Is not that a hint for us to 
go on in the right way, and to cause those far away to 
produce much, and to stand fast here to the True Eeligion ? 
Is it not therefore "Pray and labour,” that we should 
pray, and have the work done by those who do not know 
the Lord’s Prayer ? 

Oh, liow' truly A\'awelaar speaks, when he calls the yoke 
of God light ! llow easy the burden is to every one who 
believes. I am only a few years past forty, and can retire 
when I please to Driebergen, and see liow it ends with 
others who forsake the Lord. Yesterday I saw Shawlnian 
with his wife and their little boy: they looked like 
ghosts. He is pale as death, his eyes protrude, and his 



MAX IIAVELAAU. 


317 


clieeks look hollow. His attitude is bent, though he is 
vounger thau T am. She too was di'essed veiy poorly, 
and she seemed to have been weeping again : I perceived 
innuediatcly that she is of a discontented temper ; T need 

only see a person once to form an opinion ^that comes 

fi'om my experience. She had on a thin cloak of black 
silk, and yet it was very cold. There was no trace of a 
crinoline ; her thin dress hung loose round the knees, and 
a fringe hung from the edge. He had not even his shawl, 
and looked as if it was summer. Yet he seems to possess 
a kind of pride, for ho gave sometliing to a poor woman 
.sitting on a bridge. Ho who has himself so little .sins if 
lie gives anything to another. Moreover, T never give in 
the streets, that is a principle of mine, for T always say, 
when I see sirch poor peoide, Perha]>s it is their own fault, 
and I must not encourage them in their wickedness. 
Every Sunday I give twice : once for the poor, and once 
for the church. So it is right. I do not know if Shawl- 
luan saw me, but I passed rapidly .and looked upwards, and 
thought of the justice of God, who would not have allowed 
him to walk along without an overcoat if he had behaved 
better, and if he Avere not idle, self-conceited, and sickly. 

As regards my book, I must indeed beg pardon of the 
reader on account of the unpardonable manner in which 
Stern abuses our contract. T must confess that I look 
forward without pleasure to our next party, and the love- 
story of this Saidjah. The reader knoAvs already the 



318 


MAX IIAVELAAII. 


sound notions which I have about love ; — think only of my 
criticism of that excursion to the Ganges. That yoimg 
ladies take jdeasiire in such things I understand, but that 
men of years hear such nonsense without disgust is in- 
explicable to me. I will endeavour to hear nothing of 
this Saidjah, and hope that the fellow will marry soon, if 
ho is to be the hei'o of a love-story. It Avas very good 
of Stern to Avarn us that it Avill be a monotonous story. 
When he aftei'Avards commences Avith something else, 1 
Avill listen again. But I am tired almost as mueh of his 
always condemning the Gov'ernmcnt as of his love-stories. 
It may be seen from everything that Stern is young, and 
lias little experience. To judge rightly of affairs one mus'' 
see them clearly. When I married I Avent to the Hague, 
and visited the Museum with my Avife : I there came in 
contact with persons in all sorts of positions iu society ; 
for I saw the Minister of Finance pass by ; and we bought 

flannel together in Veene Street 1 and my AA'ife 1 mean 

and noAvhere did I perceive the slightest evidence of 

discontent agraiist the Government. Tlie young woman in 
the shop looked healthy and contented; and Avhen in 185G 
some tried to deceive us by saying that at the Hague all 
was not as it ought to be, I said at the party what I 
thought about the discontent, and I was believed; for every 
one knew that I spoke from experience. When returning 
from my journey, the conductor of the diligence played a 
gay popular melody, and he Avould not haA-e done that if 



MAX IIAVELAAK. 


319 


there had been so much wrong. So having paid attention 
to all, I knew immediately what to think of all that 
grumbling in 1856. 

Opposite to us there lived a young woman whose cousin 
has a Toko in the East Indies, as they call a shop there. 
If all was so very bad as Stern represents, she would like- 
wise know something about it, and yet it seems that she 
is very contented, for I never hear her complain. On the 
contrary, she says that her cousin lives there at a country 
seat, and that he is member of tlie consistoiy, and that 
he has sent her a cigar-case ornamented with peacocks^- 
feathers, which he liad himself made of bamboo. All tliis 
shows distinctly how unfounded all these complaints about 
misgovernment are. Likewise it is clear that for a, person 
who will behave pro 2 )eily, there is still something to gain 
in that country, find that when this Shawlman was tliere, 
he was idle, conceited, and sickly, otherwise he would 
not have come home so very poor; to walk about here 
without a greatcoat. And the cousin of the young 
woman who lives opposite us is not the only one who 
has made his fortune in the East Indies. In the club 
I see so many persons who have been there, and who are 
very nicely dressed. But it is plain one must pay atten- 
tion to one's business yonder as well as here. In Java 
pigeons will not fly into anybody's mouth ready roasted ; 
there must be work, and whoever will nob work is poor, 
and remains so as a matter of course. 



CHAPTER XVIL 

[cONTlNUiVriON OF STERN’s COMPOSITION.] 

Saidjah’s fatlier had a biiflalo, with which he ploughed 
his field. When this buffalo was taken away from him by 
the district chief at Parang-Koodjang he was very dejected, 
and did not speak a word for many a day. For the time', 
for ploughing was come, and he had to fear tliat if tlie 
sawah^ was not worked in time, the o])portunity to sow 
would be lost, and lastly, that tliere would be no paddy to 
cut, none to keep in the lomho)yj (store-room) of the house. 
T have here to tell nniders who know Java, luit not Bantam, 
that in that Residency there is personal landed property, 
which is not the case elsewhere. Saidjah’s father, then, 
was very uneasy. He feared that his wife would have no 
rice, nor Saidjah himself, who was still a child, nor his 
little brothers and sisters. And the district chief too 
would accuse him to the Assistant Resident if he was 
behind-hand in the payment of his land-taxes, for this is 


^ Rice-field. 



MAX IIAVELAAK. 


321 


punished by the law. Saidjah's father then took a kris^ 
wliich was poosaka^ from his father. The kris was not 
very handsome, but there were silver bands round the 
slieath, and at the end there was a silver plate. He sold 
tliis kris to a Chinaman who dwelt in the capital, and 
(^iime home with twenty-four guilders, for which money 
he bought another buffalo. 

Saidjah, who was then about seven years old, soon made 
IViends with the new buffalo. It is not without meaning 
that I say “ made friends,’* for it is indeed touching to see 
liow the Karho^ is attached to the little boy who watches 
over and feeds him. Of this attachment I shall very soon 
give an example. The large, strong animal bends its 
lieavy head to the right, to the left, or downwards, just 
as the pressure of the child’s finger, which he knows and 
understands, directs. 

Such a friendship little Saidjah had soon been able to 
make with the new-comer, and it seemed as if the en- 
couraging voice of the child gave still more strength to the 
heavy shoulders of the strong animal, when it tore open 
the stiff clay and traced its way in deep sharp furrows. 

The buffalo turned willingly, on reaching the end of the 
field, and did not lose an inch of ground when ploughing 
backwards the new furrow, which was ever near the old, 

' Kria = poniard. 

^ Poosaha *= inheritance — such a poosaka is kei)t as a holy keepsake 
(family heirloom). 

^ Karho = buffalo. 


X 



322 


MAX IIAVELAAR. 


as if the ‘ sawah * was a garden ground raked by a giant. 
Quite near were the 'sawahs* of the father of Adinda 
(the father of the child that was to marry Saidjah) ; and 
when the little brothers of Adinda came to the limit of 
their fields just at the same time that the father of Saidjah 
was there witli his plough, then the children called out 
merrily to each other, and each praised the strength and the 
docility of his buffalo. But I believe that the buffalo of 
Saidjah was the best of all ; perhai)s because its master 
knew better than any one else how to speak to the animal, 
and buffaloes are very sensible to kind words. Saidjah 
was nine and Adinda six, when this buffalo was taken 
from the father of Saidjah by the chief of the district of 
Paraiig-Koodjang. Saidj all’s father, who was very poor, 
thereupon sold to a Chinaman two silver hlamhoc?- hooks 
— ‘ poosaka’ from the ]3areiits of his wife — for eighteen 
guilders, and for that money bought a new buffalo. But 
Saidjah was very dejected. For he knew from Adincla’s 
little brothers that the other buffalo had been driven to 
the capital, and he had asked liis father if lie had not seen 
the animal when he was there to sell the hooks of the 
'klamboo.’ To this question Saidjah’s father refused to give 
an answer. Therefore he feared that his buffalo had been 
slaughtered, as the other buffaloes which the district chief 
had taken from the people. And Saidjah wept much 
when he thought of tliis poor buffalo, which he had known 


* iir/a/w&ao=: curtain. 



MAX IIAVELAAT?. 


323 


for such a long time, and he could not eat for many days, 
for his throat was too narrow when ho swallowed. It 
must be taken into consideration that Saidjah was a 
child. 

The new buffalo soon got acquainted with Saidjali, and 
very soon obtained in tlie heart of Saidjah tlie same place 
as his predecessor, — alas! too soon; for the wax impres- 
sions of the heart arc very soon smoothed to make room 
for other writing .... However tliis may be, the new 
buffalo was not so strong as the former : true, the old yoke 
was too largo for his neck, but the poor animal was 
willing, like his predecessor, which had been slaughtcired ; 
and though Saidjah could boast no more of the strength 
of his buffalo when he met Adindas brothers at the 
boundaries, yet he maintained that no other surpassed his 
in willingness ; and if the furrow was not so straight as 
before, or if lumps of earth had been turned, but not 
cut, he willingly made this right as much as he could 
Avith his imtjol} Moreover, no buffalo had an ocscr- 
ommn^ like his. The PciKjhooloo^ himself had said that 
there was ontowj"^ in the course of the hair-whirls on its 
shoulders. Once when they were in the field, Saidjah called 
in vain to his buffalo to make haste. The animal did not 
move. Saidjah grew angry at this unusual refractoriness, 
and could not refrain from scolding, lie said ‘^a 

' Paljol = spade. Pewjhooloo = village priest. 

" Oescr-ocaeran^ sec p. 14.*}. ^ Oufomj = gain, good luck. 



324 


MAX lIAVELAAll. 


s Every one who has been in India will understand 

me, and he who does not understand me gains by it if I 
spare him the explanation of a coarse expression. 

Yet Saidjah did not mean anything bad. He only said 
it because he had often heard it said by others when they 
were dissatisfied with their buffaloes. But it was useless ; 
his buffalo did not move an inch. He shook his head, as 
if to throw off the yoke, the breath appeared out of his 
nostrils, he blew, trembled, there was anguish in his blue 
eye, and the upper lip was curled upwards, so that the 
gums were bare .... 

" Fly ! Fly ! ” Adinda’s brothers cried, “ fly, Saidjah ! 
there is a tiger ! ” 

And they all unyoked the buffaloes, and throwing them- 
selves on their broad backs, galloped away through 
sawahs, galangans} mud, brushwood, forest, and allang- 
allang^ along fields and roads, and when they tore pant - 
ing and dripping with perspiration into the village of 
Badocr, Saidjah was not with them. 

For when he had freed his buffalo from the yoke, and had 
mounted him as the others had done to fly, an unexpected 
jump made him lose his seat and fall to the earth. The 
tiger was very near .... Saidjah’s buffalo, driven on by 
his own speed, jumped a few paces past the spot where his 
little master awaited death. But through his speed alone, 

^ Galaiigan = a trench for irrigating the rice-fields. 

2 AUung-allang — jungle. 



MAX IIAVELAAR. 


325 


and not of his own will, the animal had gone further than 
Saidjah, for scarcely had it conquered tlie momentum 
which rules aU matter even after the cause has ceased, 
when it returned, and placing its big body, supported by 
its big feet, like a roof over the child, turned its horned 
liead towards the tiger, which bounded forward . . . . 
but for the last time. The buffalo caught him on his 
horns, and only lost some flesh, which the tiger took out 
of his neck. The tiger lay there with his belly torn open, 
and Saidjah was saved. Certainly there had been ‘ on- 
tong ’ in the ‘ oeser-oescran ’ of the buffalo. 

When this buffalo had also been taken away from 
Saidjah’s father and slaughtered 

I told you, reader, that my story is monotonous. 

When this buffalo was slaughtered, Sai'djah was just 
twelve, and Adiiida was wearing ‘ sarongs,’ and making 
figures on them.^ She had already learned to express 
tlioughts in melancholy drawings on her tissue, for she 
had seen Saidjah very sad. And Saidjah’s father was 
also sad, but his mother stiU more so ; for she had cured 
the wound in the neck of the faithful animal whicli had 
brought her child home unhurt, after having thought, 
by the news of Adiuda’s brothers, that it had been taken 
away by the tiger. As often as she saw this wound, she 
thought how far the claws of the tiger, wliich had entered 

^ Aclinda had already learned to express thoughts on her tissue ; ahe, 
drew sad pictures on her tissue. (See page 77.) 



32G 


MAX IIAVELAAK. 


SO deeply into the coarse flesh of the buffalo, would have 
penetrated into the tender body of her chdd ; and every 
time she put fresh dressings on the wound, she caressed 
the buffalo, and spoke kindly to him, that the good faith- 
ful animal might know how grateful a mother is. 

Afterwards she hoped that the buffalo understood her, 
for then he must have understood why she wept when 
ho was taken away to be slaughtered, and he would 
have known that it was not the mother of Saidjah who 
caused him to be slaughtered. Some days afterwards 
Saidjah’s father fled out of the country ; for he was much 
afraid of being punished for not paying his land-taxes, and 
he had not another heirloom to sell, tliat ho might buy a 
new buffalo, because his parents had always lived in I’ar- 
ang-Koodjang, and had therefore loft him but few things. 
The parents of liis wife too lived in the same district. 
However, he went on for some years after the loss of his 
last buffalo, by working with hired animals for ploughing ; 
but that is a very ungiuteful labour, and moreover, sad for 
a person who has had buffaloes of his own. 

Haidjah’s mother died of grief, and then it was that his 
father, in a iiioment of dejection, fled from Jlantam, in 
order to endeavour to get labour in the l>uitenzorg dis- 
tricts. 

But he was punished with stripes, because he had left 
Lebak without a passport, and was brought back by the 
police to Badoer. There he was put in prison, because 



MAX HAVELAAll. 


327 


lie was supposed to be mad, which I can readily believe, 
mid because it was feared that he would run amuck ^ 
ill a moment of mata-glajp? But he was not long in 
prison, for he died soon afterwards. What became of the 
brothers and sisters of Saidjali I do not know. The house 
ill whicli they lived at Badoer was empty for some time, 
and soon fell down ; for it was only built of bamboo, and 
covered with ataj)? A little dust and dirt covered the 
place where there had been much suffering. There are 
many such places in Lebak. Saidjah was already fifteen 
years of age, when his father set out for Buitenzorg ; and 
he did not accompany him thither, because he had other 
plans in view. He had been told that there were at 
llatavifi many gentlemen, who drove in hcndies,^' and 
that it would be easy for him to get a post as hcndie- 
hoi/y for wliich generally a young person is chosen, so as 
not to disturb the equilibrium of the two-wheeled carriage 
by too much weight behind. lie would, they told him, gain 
much in that way if he behaved well, — perhaps he would 
be able to spare in three years money enough to buy two 
buffaloes. This was a smiling prospect for him. With 
the proud step of one who has conceived a grand idea, he, 

^ Ran amuck . — A man who runs amuck kills everybody whom he 
meets, till he is at last killed himself like a mad dog. 

2 Mata-ijUip — literally = darkened eye — darkness, frenzy. This is 
the name one gives to the peculiar state wherein a Javanese is, when, 
because of jealousy, or oj»i)ression, ho soon becomes so mad as to run 
amuck. 

A sort cane. 


1 A soi*t of carriage. 



328 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


after his father’s flight, entered Adiiida’s house, and com- 
municated to her his plan. 

“ Think of it,” said he, " when I come back we shall be 
old enough to marry, and shall possess two buffaloes !” 

Very well, Saidjah, I will gladly marry you when you 
return. I will spin and weave sarongs} and slendangs} 
and be very diligent all the time.” 

“ Oh, I believe you, Adinda, but ... if I find you 
married?’ 

" Saidjah, you know very well that I shall marry no- 
body but you ; my father promised me to your father.” 

“ And you yourself?” 

" I shall marry you, you may be sure of that.” 

When I come back, I will call from afar off.” 

Wlio shall hear it, if we are stamping rice in th(^ 
village ?” 

That is true, . . , but, Adinda, ... oh yes, this is 
better, wait for me under the djati^ wood, under the kcta- 
imn^ whore you gave me the mdattir ® 

“ But, Saidjah, how can I know when I am to go to 
the kcta^pan 

* Sarong i see page 77. 

a is fastened to h, then it 
^ is a sarong. If it is open 
unfastened, then it is 
called a sUndang, 

Djati = Quercus imlicm, Indian Oak. 

^ Ketapan — An Indian tree. ^ Mahdti— A beautiful flower. 




MAX IIAVELAAR. 


329 


Sai'djah considered and said : — 

‘‘ Count the moons ; I shall stay away three times twelve 
moons, . . . this moon not included. . . . See, Adiiida, 
at every new moon, cut a notch in your rice-block. When 
\ oil have cut three times twelve lines, I will be under the 
Ketapan the next day, ... do you promise to be tliere?” 

'' Yes, Saidjah, I will be there under the ketapan, near 
tlie djati-wood, when you come back. 

Hereupon Saidjah tore a piece off his blue turban, which 
was very much worn, and gave the piece of linen to 
Adiiida to keep it as a pledge ; and then he left her and 
J>iidoer. lie walked many days. lie passed Kankas- 
Bctong, which was not then the capital of Lebak, and 
Waroiig-Goonoong, where was the house of the Assistant 
Resident, and the following day saw Pamarangang, wliich 
lies as in a garden. The next day he arrived at Serang, 
and was astonished at the magnificence and size of the 
])lace, and the number of stone houses covered with red 
tiles. Saidjah had never before seen such a thing, lie 
remained there a day, because he was tired ; but, during 
the night, in the coolness, he went further, and tlie follow- 
ing day, before the shadow had descended to his li^is, 
tliough he wore the large ioodoong^ which his father had 
left liim, he arrived at Tangerang. 

At Tangerang he bathed in the river near the passage, 
luid rested in the house of an acquaintance of his father’s, 
1 See p. S3. 



MAX HAVELAAK. 


: 3;50 

who showed him how to make straw-hats like those that 
come from Manilla, lie stayed there a day to learn that, 
because he thought to be able to get something by that 
afterwards, if he should porliaps not succeed at Batavia. 
The following day towards the evening when it was cool 
he thanked his host very much, and went on. As soon as 
it was quite dark, when nobody could see it, he brought 
forth the leaf in which he kept the ' melatti ' which 
Adinda had given him under the " Ketapaii ’ tree, for he 
was sad because he should not see her for so long a time. 
The first day, and the second day likewise, he had not felt 
so much how lonely he was, because his soul was quite 
captivated by the grand idea of gaining money enough to 
buy two bufiiilocs, and his father had never possessed more 
than one; and his thoughts were too much concentrated 
in the hope of seeing Adinda again, to make room for 
niucli grief at his leave-taking. He took that leave in 
anxious hope, and mingled the memory of it in his 
thoughts, with the prospect of again seeing Adinda at 
last under the ketapan. Bor this ])rospcct so occupied his 
lieart that he, on leaving Badoer, and passing that tree, 
felt something like joy, as if the thirty-six moons were 
already past that se2)arated him from that moment. It 
had appeared to him as if he had only to turn round, as if 
on his return from the journey, to sec Adinda waiting for 
him under the tree. But the further he went away from 
Badoer, the more attention he i^aid to the duration of one 



MAX IIAVELAAK. 


331 


(lay, the longer lie thought the period of the thirty-six 
moons before him. There was something in his soul 
which made him walk less quickly — he felt allliction in 
liis knees, and though it was not dejection that overcame 
liim, yet it was mournfulness, which is not far from it. 
He thought of returning ; — but what would Adinda think 
of so little heart ? 

Therefore he walked on, though less rapidly than the 
lirst day. He had the ‘ melatti ’ in his hand, and often 
pressed it to his breast. He had become much older dur- 
ing tlie last three days, and he no longer understood how 
ho had lived so calmly before, when Adinda was so near 
liim, and he could see her as often as he liked. But now 
lie could not be calm, when he exxicctcd that he should 
soe licr again by and by. Nor did he understand why he 
a Her having taken leave had not returned once more to 
look at her again. And he even remembered how a short 
lime ago he had quarrelled with her about the cord which 
slie had made for the lalayany^ of her brother, and which 
had broken because there was a defect in her work by 
which a wager had been lost against the children of 
Tjipoeroet. “ How was it possible,” he thought, to have 
heen angry about that with Adinda ? For if there was a 
defect in the cord, and if the wager of Badoer against 

' Lalayamj = kite, — a game wherein they try to cut each other’s 
cord. Often matches take place between different villages. This is a 
national game in Java, like cricket in England. 



332 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


Tjipoeroet had been lost in consequence, and not by tlie 
I)iece of glass whicli little Djamien liad thrown while hid- 
ing himself beliind the f agger} ought I then to have 
been so rough to her, and called her by unseemly names ? 
What if I die at Batavia without having asked her pardon 
for sucli harshness ? Will it not make me appear as if 1 
were a bad man, who scolds a girl ? And when it is heard 
that I have died in a foreign country, will not every one 
at Badoer say, ' It is good tliat Scaidjah died ; for he had 
an insolent mouth against Adinda V 
Thus his tlioughts took a course which differed much 
from their former buoyancy, and involuntarily were 
uttered, first in halfwords and softly, soon in a monologue, 
and at last in the melancholy song, of which a translation 
follows. My first intention was to have recourse to mea- 
sure and rhyme in this translation ; but, like llavelaar, 
1 thought it better to leave it without the corset. 

“ I do not know where I shall die. 

I saw tlic great sea on the south-coast, 

when I was there with my father making salt ; 

If 1 die at sea, and my body is thrown into the 
deep water, then sharks will come : 

They will swim round my corpse, and ask, ‘ Which of 

us shall devour the body, that goes down into the water ? ’ 

I shall not hear it ! 


' PaijtjtYy -—an enclosure constructed of bamboo canes. 

2 Making salt. This means to do something against the law. Salt 
is a monopoly of the Government. The Javanese is obliged to buy 
from the magazines of the Government. Sai'djah in his simplicity is 
saying something — which the police ought not to hear ! 



MAX HAVELAAK. 


333 


“ I do not know where I shall die. 

I saw in a blaze the house of Pa-ansoe, which he 

himself has set on fire because he was mafa-ijlap ; 

If I die in a burning house, glowing embers 
will fall on my corx)se ; 

And outside the house there will be many cries of 
men throwing water on the fire to kill it ; — 

I shall not hear it ! 

“I do not know where I shall die. 

1 saw the little Si-Ocnah fall out of a klapx^a-tree, 
when he plucked a Iclappa^ for his mother ; 

ff I fall out of a klappa-tree T shall lie dead 
below, in the shrubs, like Si-Ocnali. 

Then my mother will not weep, for she is dead. But 

others will say with a loud voice : SSee, there lies ISaidjah.’ 

1 shall not hear it ! 

1 do not know where I shall die. 

1 have seen the corpse of Pa-lisoe, who dietl of 
old age j for his hairs were white : 

If 1 die of old age, with white hairs, 

hired women will stand weeping near my corpse ; 

And they will make lamentation, as did the mourners over 

Pa-lisoe’s corjise ; and the grandchildren will weep, very loud ; 
I shall not hear it I 

do not know where I shall die. 

I have seen at Badoer many that were dead. They 

were dressed in white shrouds, and were buried in the earth j 

If I die at Badoer, and I am buried beyond the dessah,^ 
eastward against the hill, where the grass is high ; 

Then will Adinda pass by there, and the border of 
her sarong will sweep softly along the grass, . . , 

I SHALL hear it.” 

Saidjali arrived at Batavia. He begged a gentleman 
to take him into his service, which this gentleman did, 

^ = cocoa-nut. 

Dessah = Javanese village. 



334 


MAX IIAVELAAK. 


because he did not understand Saidjali's language;' for tlie> 
like to have servants at Batavia who do not speak Malay, 
and are, therefore, not so corrupted as others, who hav(i 
been longer in connexion with Europeans. Sa'idjah soon 
learned Malay, but behaved well ; for he always thought 
of the two buffaloes which he should l)uy, and of Adinda. 
He became tall and strong, because he ate every day, 
what could not always be had at Badoer. lie was liked 
in the stable, and would certainly not have been rejected, 
if he had asked the hand of the coachman's daughter. 
Ilis master even liked Sa'idjah so much that he soon 
X)romoted him to be an indoor servant, increased his 
wages, and continually made him presents, to show that 
he was well pleased with his services. Saidjah’s mistress 
had read Sue's novel, ^ which for a short time was so 
popular: she always thought of Prince l)j aim a when she 
saw Sa'idjah, and the young girls, too, understood better 
than before how the Javanese painter, Padeen Saleh, had 
met Avith such great success at Paris. 

But they thought Saidjah ungrateful, when he, after 
almost three years of service, asked for his dismissal, and 
a certificate that he had always behaved well. This could 
not be refused, and Sa'idjah went on his journey with a 
joyful heart. 

lie passed Pisang, where Havclaar once lived many 
years ago. But Saidjah did not know this, . . . and even 
' Soondanese. [jV Jwf Errant. 



MAX IfAVELAAK. 


335 


if he had known it, lie had something else in his soul 
which occupied him. ... He counted the treasures which 
he was carrying home. In a roll of bamboo he had his 
passport and a certificate of good conduct. In a case, 
which was fastened to a leathern girdle, something heavy 
seemed to sling continually against his shoulder, but lie 
liked to feel that. . . . And no wonder ! . . . this con- 
tained thirty piastres,^ enough to buy three buffaloes ! 
What would Adinda say ? And this was not all. On his 
back could be seen the silver-covered sheath of the 
which he wore in the girdle. The hilt was certainly very 
fine, for he had wound it round with a silk vvrap])or. 
And he had still more treasures 1 In the folds of the 
kaliin^ round his loins, he kept a belt of silver links, with 
gold ihat-pciulieiig} It is true that the belt was short, but 
she was so slender. . . . Adinda ! 

And suspended by a cord round his neck, under his 
haadjoe^ he wore a small silk bag, in which were some 
withered leaves of the ^ melatti.’ 

Was it a wonder that he stopped no longer at San- 
gerang than was necessary to visit the acquaintances of his 
lather who made such fine straw hats ? Was it a w^ondcr 

^ 54 guilders. 

^ The Javanese is never without his poniard ; it belongs to his 
dress. 

3 Kahin = a piece of linen. 

Ikat-j>endie')ig — pendieng is a girdle of small plates of silver or 
gold, and ikat- pendieng — the clasp of it (^^vra/e). 

Baculjoe = clothes. 



33G 


MAX IIAVELAAll. 


that he said little to the girls on his road, who asked 
him where he came from, and where he was going— the 
common saluation in those regions? Was it a wonder 
that he no longer thought Serang so beautiful, he who 
had learnt to know Batavia? That he hid himself no 
more behind the ‘pagger’ as he did three years ago, 
when he saw the Resident riding out ; for ho had seen 
the much grander lord, who lives at Buitenzorg, and 
who is the grandfather of the Soosoohoonan (Emperor) of 
Solo Was it a wonder that he did not pay much atten- 
tion to the tales of those who went a part of the way with 
him, and spoke of the news in Bantam-Kidool ; how the 
coffee culture had been quite suspended after much un- 
rewarded labour ; how the district chief of Parang-Kood- 
jang had been co^jjjjeinned to fourteen days’ arrest at the 
house of his father-in-law for highway robbery ; how the 
capital had been removed to Rankas-Betong ; how a new 
Assistant Resident was there, because the other had died 
some months ago ; how this new functionary had spoken 
at the first Sehah meeting ; how for some time nobody had 
been punished for complaining; how the people hoped 
that all that had been stolen would be returned or paid 
for? 

No, he had sublime visions before his mind’s eye. He 
sought for the ' Ketapan’ tree in the clouds, as he was still 
too far off to seek it at Badoer, He caught at the air 

^ A superstition of the Javanese. 



MAX HAVKLAAK. 


337 


which surrounded him, as if he Avould embrace the form 
which was to meet him under that tree. He xuctured to 
himself the face of Adinda, her head, her shoulders ; he 
saw the heavy kondeh (cliignon), so black and glossy, con- 
fined in a net, hanging down her neck ; he saw her large 
eye glistening in dark reflection ; the nostrils wliich she 
raised so proudly as a child, when he how was it pos- 
sible ? vexed her, and the corner of her lips, where she 

preserved a smile ; he saw her breast, which would now 
swell under the kabaai ; ^ he saw how well the saromj of 
her own making fitted her hips, and descending along the 
tliighs in a curve, fell in graceful folds on the small foot. 

No ; he heard little of wliat was told him. He heard 
.quite different tones; he heard how Adinda would say 
Welcome, Saidjah! I have thought of you in spinning 
and weaving, and stamping the rice on the floor, Avhich 
bears three times twelve lines jnade by my hand. Here I 
am under the ' Ketapan ' the first day of the new moon. 
Welcome, Saidjah, I will be your wife.’' 

That was the music which resounded in his ears, and 
prevented him from listening to all the news that was told 
him on the road. 

At last he saw the ‘ Ketapan,' or rather he saw a large 
dark spot, which many stars covered, before his eye. 
That must be the wood of Djati, near the tree where he 
should see again Adinda, next morning after sunrise. He 


^ Indian dress. 



338 


MAX IIAVELAAR. 


sought in the dark, and felt many trunks — soon found the 
well-known roughness on the south side of a tree, and 
thrust his finger into a hole which Si-Panteh had cut 
with his parang^ to exorcise the pontianah^ who was 
the cause of his mother’s toothache, a short time before 
the birtli of Panteh’s little brother. That was the Keta- 
pan he looked for. 

Yes, tliis was indeed tlie spot wlierc he had looked upon 
Adinda for the first time with rpiite a different eye from 
his other companions in play, because she had for the first 
time refused to take part in a game wliich she had played 
with other children — boys and girls — only a short time 
before. There she liad given him the ' melatti.’ He sat 
down at the foot f)f the tree, and looked at the stars ; and 
when lie saw a shooting-star he accepted it as a welcome 
of his return to Padoer, and he thought whether Adinda 
would now be asleep, and whether she had rightly cut the 
moons on lun* rice floor. It would be such a grief to him 
if slu‘. had omitted a moon, as if thirty-six were not 
enough! . . . And he wondered Avdiether she had made nice 
^sarong’s’ and ‘slendangs?’ And he asked himself, too, who 
would now be dwelling in her father s house ? And he 
thought of his youth, and of his mother ; and how that 
buffalo had saved him from tlie tiger, and he thought of 
what would luive become of Adinda if that buffalo had 

1 An imjlement used by fanners in cutting grass and wood. 

Evil spirit. 



MAX HAVELAAH. 


339 


been less faithful ! He paid much attention to the sinhing 
of tlie stars in the west, and as each star disappeared in 
tlic horizon, he calculated how much nearer the sun was 
to his rising in the east, and how much nearer he himself 
was to seeing Adinda. For she would certainly come at 

the first beam ^yes, at daybreak she would be there, . . . 

Ah ! Why had not she already come the day before ? 

It pained him, that she had not anticipated the supreme 
moment wdiich had lighted up his soul for three years 
with inexpressible brightness; and, unjust as he was in 
the selfisliness of his love, it aiipcared to him that Adinda 
ought to have been there waiting for him, who com- 
plained before the time appointed, that he had to wait 
for her. 

And he complained unjustly, for neither had the sun 
risen, nor had the eye of day cast a 'glance on the plain. 
The stars, it is true, were growing pale up there \ ashamed 
as they were of the approaching end of their rule ; strange 
eoloum were flowing over the tops of the mountains, 
which appeared darker as they contrasted sharply with 
places more brightly illuminated; hero and there flowed 
something glowing in the east— arrows of gold and of 
fire that were shot hither and thither, parallel t(^ the 
horizon -but they disappeared again, and seemed to fall 
down behind the impenetrable curtain, which hid the 
day from the eyes of Saidjah. Yet it grew lighter and 
lighter around him- he now saw the landscape, and could 



340 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


already distinguish a part of the Klappa-wood behind 
which Badoer lay : —there Adinda slept. 

No ! surely she did not sleep ; how could she sleep ? 
. , Did she not know that Saidjah would be awaiting her ? 
She had not slept the wliole night certainly ; the night 
police of the village had knocked at her door to ask, why 
the pelitat (Javanese lamp) continued burning in her 
cottage ; and with a sweet laugh she had said, that a 
vow kep)t her awake to weave the ‘ slendang,’ in which she 
was occupied, and which must be ready before . the first 
day of the new moon. 

Or she had i)assed the night in darkness, sitting on the 
rice floor and counting with her eager finger, that indeed 
thirty-six deep lines were cut near each other. And she 
had amused herself with an imaginary fright as to whether 
she had miscalculated, perhaps had counted one less, to 
enjoy again and again, and every time, the delicious as- 
surance, that without fail three times twelve moons had 
passed since Saidjah saw her for the last time. 

And now that it was becoming light, she too would be 
exerting herself with useless trouble, to bend her looks 
over the horizon to meet the sun, the lazy sun, that 
stayed away .... stayed away. . . . 

There came a line of bluish-red, which touched the 
clouds and made the edges light and glowing ; — and it 
began to lighten, and again arrows of fire shot through 
the atmosphere; but this time they did not disappear. 



MAX HAVEL AAR. 


341 


tliey seized upon the dark ground, and coiiimuuicated 
their blaze in larger and larger circles, meeting, crossing, 
unrolling, turning, wandering, and uniting in patches of 
fire and lightnings of golden lustre on the azure ground 
. . . there was red, and blue, and silver, and purple, and 
yellow, and gold, in all this ... oh God ! that was the 
daybreak, that was seeing Adinda again ! 

Saidjah had not learnt to pray, and it would have been 
a pity to teach him ; for a more holy prayer, more fervent 
thanksgiving than was in the mute rapture of his soul, 
could not be conceived in human language. He would not 
go to Badoer — to see Adinda in reality seeming to him 
less pleasurable than the expectation of seeing her again. 
He sat down at the foot of the ‘ Ketapan,' and his eyes 
wandered over the scenery. Nature smiled at him, and 
seemed to welcome him as a mother welcoming the return 
of her child, and as she pictiuxis her joy by voluntary 
remembrance of past grief, when showing what she has 
preserved as a keepsake during his absence. So Saidjah 
was delighted to see again so many spots that were wit- 
nesses of his short life. But his eyes or his thoughts 
might wander as they pleased, yet his looks and longings 
always reverted to the path which leads from Badoer to 
the Ketapan tree. All that his senses could oliserve was 
called Adinda. . . . He saw the abyss to the left, wdiere 
the earth is so yellow, where once a young buffalo sank 
down into the depth, — they had descended with strong 



342 


MAX IIAVELAAE. 


rattan cords, and Adinda’s father had been the bravest. 
Oh, how she claiipcd her liands, Adiiida! And tliere, 
further on, on the other side, wliere tlie wood of cocoa- 
trees waved over the cottages of the village, there some- 
where, Si-Oenah had fallen out of a tree and died. How 
his mother cried, ‘^because Si Ocnah was still such a little 
one,’* she lamented, ... as if she would have been less 
grieved if Si-Oenah had been taller. But he was small, 
that is true, for he was smaller and more fragile than 
Adinda. . . . Nobody walked upon the little road which 
loads from Badoer to the tree. By and by she would 
come ... it was yet very early. 

Saidjah saw a ladjing (squirrel) spring with playful 
nimbleness up the trunk of a cocoa-tree. The graceful 
animal — the terror of the proprietor of the tree, but still 
lovely in form and movement — ran untiringly up and 
down. Saidjah saw it, and forced himself to stay and look 
at it, because this calmed his thoughts after their heavy 
labour since sunrise — rest after the fatiguing expectancy. 
Soon he uttered his impressions in words, and sang what 
his soul dictated him. I would ratlier read you his lay 
in IMalay, that Italian language of the East : — 

“ See, liow the ‘ hadjiiig ’ looks for his means of living 
On the Klappa-ti ee. He ascends, descends, wantons right and left. 
He turns (round the tree), springs, falls, climbs, and falls again. 

He has no wings, and yet he is as cpiick as a bird. 

Much happiness, my ‘badjing,’ — 1 give you hail ! 

You will surely find the means of living which you seek ; 

But 1 am sitting alone near the wood of Djati-trees 



MAX HAVELAAH. 


343 


Waiting for the food of my heart. 

Long has the small appetite of my hadjing been sated ; 

Long has he returned to his little nest ; 

But still my soul 

And my heart are very sad . . . Adinda ! ” 

Still there was nobody on the patli leading from Badoer 
to the Kdapan. . . . 

Sauljah caught sight of a butterfly which seenu'd to 
enjoy itself in the increasing warmth .... 

“ See how the butterfly flutters everywhere ; 

His wings glisten like a flower of many eohnirs ; 

His heart is in love with the blossoms of the h'narl,'^ 

(.^ertainly he looks for liis fragrant sweetlK'art. 

Much joy, my butterfly, — I give you hail ! 

You will surely find what you seek ; 

But I am sitting alone near the Djati-wood, 

Waiting for what my heart loves : 

Long since has the butterfly kissed 
The kenarl blossom which it loves so well ; 

But still my soul 

And my heart are very sad .... Adiiida ! ” 

And still there was no one on the path leading from 
Badoer to the Kekqjan, 

The sun began to rise liigb, — tliere was warmth in the 
air. 


“ See how the sun glitters on higli, 

High above the warhvji'^ — ^hill ! 

He feels too warm and wishes to descend, 

To sleej) in the sea as in the arms of a spouse. 


' Kenariy a beautiful tree. The keiiari i)rodiices a nut, of which 
very good oil is made. 

Warin<ji, one of the most beautiful trees in Java. 



344 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


Much joy, O sun, — I give you hail ! 

What you seek you will surely lind ; 

But [ sit alone hy the Djati-wood 
Waiting for rest for my heart. 

Long the sun will have set 
And will sleep in the sea, when all is dark ; 

And still my soul 

And my heart will he very sad . . . Adinda ! ” 

And tliorc was nobody on the road leading from Badoer 
to tlie Ketapan. 

When no longer butterflies shall flutter about, 

When the stars shall no longer glitter, 

When the molattl shall no longer yields its perfume, 

When there shall be no longer sad hearts, 

Nor wild animals in the wood, 

When the sun shall go wTong 

And the moon forget the cast and the west, 

If Adinda has not yet arrived, 

Then an angel with shining wings 

Will descend on eartli, to look for what remained behind : 
Then my cor[)se shall be here under the ketapan — 

My soul is very sad, .... Adinda ! ” 

There was nobody on the j)ath. leading from Badoer to 
the Ketapan. 

“ Then my corpse will be seen by the angel, 

He will ])oint it out with his finger to his brethren — 

‘ See, a dead man has been forgotten. 

His rigid mouth kisses a mdatti flower : 

Come, let us take him up to heaven. 

Him who has waited for Adinda, till ho died. 

Surely, he may not stay behind alone. 

Whose heart had the strength to love so much,’ 

Then my rigid mouth shall open once more. 

To call Adinda whom my heart loves, 

I will kiss the melatli once more, 

Which s/te gave me ... . Adinda ! . . . . Adinda ! ” 



MAX HAVELAAR. 


345 


And still there was nobody on the path leading from 
Badoer to the Ketapan, 

Oh ! she mnst have fallen asleep towards morning, 
tired of watching during the night, of watching for many 
nights : — she had not slept for weeks : so it was ! 

Should he rise and go to Badoer ! — hTo, that would be 
doubting her arrival. Should he call that man who was 
driving his buffalo to the field ? . . . . That man was too 
far off, and moreover, Saidjah would speak to no one 
about Adinda, would ask no one after Adinda .... He 
would see her again, he would see her alone, he would see 
her first. Oh, surely, surely she would soon come ! 

He would wait, wait .... 

But if she were ill, or ... . dead ? 

Like a wounded stag Saidjah flew along the path 
leading from the ' Ketapan’ to the village where Adinda 
lived. He saw nothing and heard nothing; and yet he 
could have heard something, for there were men standing 
in the road at the entrance of the village, who cried — 
“ Saidjah, Saidjah !” 

But, .... was it his hurry, his eagerness, that pre- 
vented him from finding Adinda’s house ? He had already 
riLshed to the end of the road, through the village, and 
like one mad, he returned and beat his head, because he 
must have passed her house without seeing it. But again 
he was at the entrance of the village, and, .... Oh God, 
was it a dream ? . . . 



346 


MIX HAVEL A All. 


Again he had not found the house of Adinda. Again 
he flew back and suddenly stood still, seized his head 
with both his hands to press away tlie madness that 
overcame him, and cried aloud - - 

“ Drunk, drunk ; I am drunk !*' 

And the women of Badoer came out of their houses, 
and saw with sorrow poor Sa'idjah standing there, for they 
knew him, and understood that he was looking for the 
house of Adinda, and they knew that there was no house 
of Adinda in the village of Badoer. 

For, when the district chief of Parang-Koodjang had 
taken away Adinda’s father’s buffaloes. . . . 

I told you, reader ! that my narrative was monotonous. 

.... Adinda’s mother died of grief, and her baby 
sister died because she had no mother, and had no one to 
suckle her. And Adinda’s father, who feared to be 
punished for not paying his land-taxes. , . . 

I know, I know that my tale is monotonous. 

.... had fled out of the country ; he had taken Adinda 
and her brothers wnth him. But he had heard how the 
father of Saidjah had been punished at Buitenzorg with 
stripes for leaving Badoer without a passport. And, 
therefore, Adinda’s father had not gone to Buitenzorg, nor 
to the Preangan, nor to Bantam. He had gone to Tjilang- 
kahan, the quarter of Lebak bordering on the sea. There 
he had concealed himself in the woods, and waited for the 
arrival of Pa Ento, Pa Lontah, Si Oeniah, Pa Ansive, 



MAX IIAVELAAR. 


347 


Abdoel Isma, and some others that had been robbed of 
their buffaloes by the district chief of Parang-Koodjang, 
and all of whom feared punishment for not paying their 
land-taxes. 

There they had at night taken possession of a fishing- 
boat, and had gone to sea. They had steered towards the 
west, and kept the country to the right of them as far as 
Java Head : then they had steered northwards till they 
came in sight of Prince’s Island, and sailed round the 
east coast of that island, and from there to the ’Lam- 
poons. 

Such at least was the way that people told each otlier 
in whispers in Lebak, when there was a question of buffalo 
robbery and unpaid land-taxes. 

But Saidjah did not well understand what they said to 
him ; he did not even quite understand the news of his 
father’s death. There was a buzzing in his ears, as if a 
gong had been sounded in his head : he felt the blood 
tlirobbing convulsively through the veins of his temples, 
that threatened to yield under the pressure of such severe 
distension. He spoke not : and looked about as one stu- 
pefied, without seeing what was round and about him; 
and at last he began to laugh horribly. 

An old woman led him to her cottage, and took care of 
the poor fool. 

Soon lie laughed less horribly, but still did not speak. 
But during the night the inhabitants of the hut were 



348 


MAX hav?:laak. 


frightened at his voice, when he sang monotonously : " I 
do not know where I shall die,” and some inhabitants of 
Badoer put money together, to bring a sacrifice to the 
Ix^ajas^ of the Tji-Udjung for the cure of Saidjah, whom 
they thought insane. But he was not insane. 

For upon a certain night when the moon was very clear, 
he rose from the lalch-haleli^ softly left the house, and 
sought the place where Adinda had lived. This was not 
easy, because so many houses had fallen down; but he 
seemed to recognise the place by the width of the angle 
which some rays of light formed through the trees, at 
their meeting in his eye, as the sailor measures by light- 
houses and the. tops of mountains. 

Yes, tliere it ought to be : — there Adinda had lived ! 

Stumbling over half-rotten bamboo and pieces of the 
fallen roof, he made his way to the sanctuary which he 
sought. And, indeed, he found something of the still 
standing pagger^ near to which the lalch-baleh of Adinda 
had stood, and even the pin of bamboo was still with its 
point in that pagger, the pin on which she hung her dress 
when she went to bed 

But the baleh-baleh had fallen down h'ke the house, and 

^ Bojajas = crocodiles. “ To bring a sacrifice to the crocodiles.” 
Such sacrifices are much in vogue. Some fruits and some pastry, or a 
few hen’s eggs, are placed on a saucer of bamboo, one or more burning 
wax-lights are added, all this is placed on the river, and the floating 
down of many such sacrifices is a beautiful siglit. 

Bale/i-baleh =s couch. ^ Enclosure. 



MAX HAVELAAR. 


349 


was almost turned to dust. He took a handful of it, 
pressed it to his opened lips, and breathed very hard. . . . 

The following day he asked the old woman, who had 
taken care of him, where the rice-floor was which stood in 
the grounds of Adinda’s house. The woman rejoiced to 
hear him speak, and ran through the village to seek the 
floor. When she could point out the new proprietor to 
Saidjah, he followed her silently, and being brought to 
the rice-floor, he counted thereupon thirty-two lines. . . . 

Then he gave the woman as many piastres as were 
required to buy a buffalo, and left Badoer. At Tjilang- 
kahan, he bought a fishing-boat, and, after having sailed 
two days, arrived in the Lampoons, where the insurgents 
were in insurrection against the Dutch rule. He joined a 
troop of Badoer men, not so much to fight as to seek 
Adinda ; for he had a tender heart, and was more disposed 
to sorrow than to bitterness. 

One day that the insurgents had been beaten, he 
wandered through a village that had just been taken by 
the Dutch army, and was therefore^ in flames. Saidjah 
knew that the troop that had been destroyed there con- 
sisted for the most part of Badoer men. He wandered 
like a ghost among the houses, wliich were not yet burned 
down, and found the corpse of Adinda’s father with a 

^ Read the address of the Lieutenant-General Van Swieten to his 
soldiers. See Ideen (Ideas) of Multatuli, first bundle, and the speech 
of Mr. Douwes Dekker in the Annales of the International Congress for 
the Promotion of Social Science (Amsterdam, 1804). 



350 


MAX IIAVKIAAK. 


bayonet- wound in the breast. Near him Said j ah saw the 
three murdered brothers of Adinda, still boys — children, 
— and a little further lay the corpse of Adinda, naked, and 
horribly mutilated. . . . 

A small j)iece of blue linen had penetrated into the 
gaping wound in the breast, w'hich seemed to have made 
an end to a long struggle. . . . 

Then Saidjah went to meet some soldiers who were 
driving, at the point of the bayonet, the surviving insur- 
gents into the fire of the burning houses ; he embraced the 
broad bayonets, pressed forward with all his might, and 
still repulsed the soldiers, with a last exertion, until their 
weapons were buried to the sockets in his breast. 

A little time afterwards there was much rejoicing at 
Batavia for the now victory, which so added to the laurels 
of the Dutch-lndian army. And the Governor wrote that 
tranquillity had been restored in the Lampoons ; the King 
of Holland, eidightcued by his statesmen, again rewarded 
so much heroism witli many orders of knighthood. 

And probably thanksgivings mounted to heaven from 
the hearts of the saints in churclies and tabernacles, at the 
news that “ the Lord of hosts ” had again fought under 
the banner of Holland. . . . 

“ But God, moved with so much woe, 

Hid not accci)t .the sacrifices of that day ! ” ^ 


^ “ But God ill high displeasure turned awfiy, 
And honoured not the olferings of that day.’* 



MAX HAVELAAll. 


351 


I have made the end of the history of Said j ah shorter 
than I could have done if I had felt inclined to jjaint 
something dreary. The reader will have observed how I 
lingered over the description of the waiting under the 
Ketapan, as if I was afraid of the sad catastrophe, and how 
1 glided over that with aversion. And yet that was not 
my intention, when I began to speak about Saidjah. For 
I feared that stronger colours were requisite to move when 
describing such strange circumstances. Yet while writing 
I felt that it would be an insult to the reader to believe 
that I ought to liave put more blood in my picture 

I could have done it, for I have documents before mo 
. . . but no ! — rather a confession. 

Yes ! a confession. I do not know whether Saidjah 
loved Adinda; 1 know not whether he went to Badoer, 
nor whether he died in the Lampoons by Duteli bayonets. 
I do not know whether his father died by being beaten 
with rods, because he left Badoer without a passport, I 
do not know wliether Adinda counted the moons by lines 
in her rice-floor. 

All this I do not know. 

But T know more than all this. I know, mid I can 
pro'oc it, that there were many Adindas and many 
Saidjahs, and that vdiat was fiction in one case, becomes 
truth yenerally speaking. I have already said that I can 
give the names of persons who, like the parents of Saidjah 
and Adinda, were driven away by oppression from their 



352 


MA.X HAVELAAR. 


country. It is not my intention to publish in this book 
communications such as would be suitable for a tribunal 
that had to decide on the manner in which the x)utcli 

power is exercised in India, communications that 

would have the power to convince him only who had 
patience enough to read them all, which cannot be ex- 
pected of the public that looks for recreation in its reading. 
Therefore instead of barren names of persons and places 
with the dates, instead of a copy OF tjie list of thefts 
AND EXTORTIONS WHICH LIES BEFORE ME, 1 have tried to 
give a sketch of what can take place in the hearts of the 
poor people wlio are robbed of their means of subsistence ; 
or even, I have only made you guess this, as I feared 
to be mistaken in painting emotions which I never ex- 
perienced. 

But as regards the main point . . . O that I were sum- 
moned to prove what 1 wrote ! O that it were said, “ You 
invented that Saidjah : he never sang that lay ; there never 
lived an Adiuda in Badoer ! ” O that it wei'e said with 
the jjower and the will to do justice as soon as I have 
proved myself to have been no slanderer ! 

Is there untruth in the parable of the Good Samaritan, 
because perhaps a plundered traveller was never taken to 
the Samaritan’s house ? Is there untruth in the parable 
of the Sower, because it is clear that no husbandman wUl 
throw his seed on a rock ? or, to descend to more con- 
formity with my book, can the main thing truth be 



MAX IIAVELAAR. 


353 


denied to “Uncle Tom’s Cabin,” because there never existed 
an Evangeline ? Shall people say to the author of that 

immortal protest immortal, not because of art or 

talent, but because of tendency and impression shall 

they say to her, “You have lied : the slaves arc not ill- 
treated ; for there is untruth in your book — it is a novel 1 ” 
Had not she to give a tale, instead of an enumeration of 
barren facts, a tale which surrounded those facts, to intro- 
duce them into our hearts ? Would lier book have been 
read if she had given it the form of a law-suit ? Is it her 
fault or mine, that truth, to find entrance, has so often to 
boiTOw the DRESS of a lie ? 

And to some who will pretend that I have too much 
idealized Saidjah and his love, I ask how they can know 
this ; as only very few Europeans have given themselves 
the trouble to stoop to observe tlie emotions of the coffee 
and sugar machines, called “ Natives.” But even if this 
observation were well founded, whosoever quotes this as a 
proof against the cardinal tendency of my book, gives me a 
complete triumph. Eor that observation when translated 
is as follows : — “ The evil which you combat does not 
exist, or not in such a high degree, because the native is 
not like your Saidjah : there is not in the ill-treatment of 
the Javanese so much evil as there would be if you had 
rightly drawn your Saidjah. The Soondanese do not sing 
such songs, do not love so, do not feel thus. . . .” 

No, Colonial Ministers ! no, Govemors-General in re- 

z 



354 


MAX IIAVELAAU. 


tirement ! you have not to prove that. You have to prove 
that the population is not ill-treated, whether there are 
sentimental Saidjahs amongst this population or not; or 
should you dare to pretend that you may steal buffaloes 
of men who do not love, who do not sing melancholy 
songs, who are not sentimental ? 

On an attack upon literary performances I should 
defend the exactness of the picture of Saidjah, but on 
political grounds I admit immediately all observations on 
this exactness, to prevent the great question from heimj 
removed to a wrong basis. It is quite indifferent to me 
whetlier I am thought to he an incapable painter, if it is 
only admitted that the ill-treatment of the native is 
EXCESSIVE ; that is the word on the notice of Ilavelaar’s 
predecessor which he showed to the Controller Verbrugge : 
a notice which lies before me. 

But / have other proofs, and that is fortunate. For this 
predecessor of Havclaar could also have been mistaken. 

Alas, if he was mistaken, he has been very severely 
punished for his mistake ! 



CHAPTEE XVIIL 
[continuation of stern's composition.] 

It was afternoon. Havelaar, coming out of his room, 
found Tine in the fore-gallery, waiting for him at the 
tea-table. Madam Slotering liad just left her house, and 
seemed to have the intention of going to Ilavelaar's, but 
suddenly she went to the gate, and there, witli very violent 
gestures, sent back a man who had just entered. She 
remained standing still till she felt sure that he had gone 
away, and then returned along the grass-field to Have- 
laar's. 

I will know at last what this means,” said Havelaar ; 
and when the salutation was over he asked, jokingly, that 
she might not think he grudged her influence in grounds 
which formerly were hers : 

'' Now, Madam, do tell me why you always send back 
the men who come into the grounds. What if that man, 
for instance, had fowls to sell, or any other kitchen 
requisite ?” 

There was in the face of Madam Slotering a painful 
expression, which did not escape Havelaar’s observation. 



356 


MAX IIAVELAAIl. 


All/' she said, there are so many bad men." 

''Certainly, that is the case everywhere; but if you 

are so particular, the good ones will stay away too. 

Come now, Madam, tell me why you keep such a sharp 
look-out over the grounds?" 

llavelaar looked at her, and endeavoured in vain to 
read the reply in her watery eyes. He again pressed for 
an explanation, and the widow burst into tears, saying 
that her husband had been poisoned at Parang-Koodjang, 
in the house of the district chief. 

" He would do justice, Mr. Havelaar !" continued the 
poor woman ; " he wished to put an end to the oppression 
of the jieople. He exhorted and threatened the chiefs in 
councils and in writing ; you must have found his letters 
in the archives ..." 

That was the case : Havelaar had read those letters, of 
which I have copies before me. 

" He spoke repeatedly to the Eesident," continued the 
widow, "but always in vain; for as it w^as generally 
known that tlie extortion was for and under the protection 
of the Eegent, whom the Eesident would not complain of 
to the Government, all these conversations had no other 
effect than tlie ill treatment of the complainants. There- 
fore my poor husband had said that if no alteration should 
be made before the end of the year, he would apply direct 
to the Governor-General. That was in November. A few 
days later he made a journey of inspection, took his dinner 



MAX IIAVELAAK. 


357 


at the house of the Demang of Parang -Koodjang, and soon 
afterwards was brought home in a pitiable condition, lie 
cried, while pointing to his stomach, ' Eire, fire,* and in a 
few hours he was dead ; he who had always been remark- 
able for good health.** 

Did you send for the Serang doctor ?’* asked Havelaar. 

Yes, but my husband died soon after his arrival. I 
did not dare to tell the doctor iny suspicion, because 1 
foresaw that I should not be able soon to leave this place, 
and I feared revenge. I have heard that you, like my 
husband, oppose the abuses which reign licre, and there- 
fore I have not a moment’s peace. 1 would have concealed 
all this from you to avoid frightening you and Madam 
Havelaar, and so I only watched the grounds to prevent 
strangers from entering the kitchen.** 

Now it was clear to Tine why Madam Slotering had 
kept her own household, and would not even make use of 
tlie kitchen, which was so large. Havelaar sent for the 
Controller. Meanwhile he sent a request to tlie physician 
at Serangj^to make a statement of the symptoms attending 
the death of Slotering. The reply which he received tlie 
next day to that request, was not in accordance with the 
widow*s suspicions. According to the doctor, Slotering 
had died of an abscess in the liver.** I do not know 
whether such a disease can manifest itself suddenly, and 
cause death in a few hours. I think I must bear in mind 
the evidence of Madam Slotering, that her husband had 



358 


MAX llAVELAAK. 


formerly been always healthy ; but if no value is attached 
to such evidence, because the notion of what is called 
health varies with different persons, particularly in the 
eyes of non-medical individuals, yet the important ques- 
tion remains, whetlier a person who dies to-day of an 
abscess in the liveiV could ride on horseback yesterday, 
with the intention of inspecting a mountainous country, 
which is in some directions eighty miles in extent ? 

The doctor who treated Sloteriiig may have been a 
skilful physician, and yet have been mistaken in his 
judgment of the symptoms of the disease, unprepared as 
he was to suspect crime. However this may be, I cannot 
prove that Havelaar’s predecessor was poisoned, because 
llavelaar was not allowed time to clear up the matter ; 
but I can prove that every one believed in the poisoning, 
an'd that this was suspected on account of his desire to 
oppose injustice. 

The Controller Verbrugge entered Havelaar’s room ; 
the latter asked abruptly — 

“ What did Mr. Slotering die of ?” 

I don’t know.” 

“ Was he poisoned ?” 

I don’t know ; . . . . but ” 

“ Speak plainly, Verbrugge.” 

But he endeavoured to oppose the abuses, as you do 
.... and he would certainly have been poisoned if he 
had remained here longer.” 



MAX HAVKLAAR. 


359 


‘‘ Write that down !” 

Verbrugge wrote it .... it lies before me. 

To proceed, Is it true, or untrue, that much extortion 
is committed in Lebak?” 

Verbrugge made no reply. 

'' Answer me, Verbrugge !” 

“ I dare not.” 

Write down that you dare not.” 

Verbrugge wrote it down .... it lies Ixdbre me. 

“ Well, to proceed, you dare not answer the last ques- 
tion. You told me lately, when there was a question 
about poisoning, that you were the only support of your 
sisters at Batavia,— is that the reason of your fear, of what 
I always called your lialfmssV 
^^Yes.” 

Verbrugge wrote it down .... his declaration lies be- 
fore me. 

“ That will do,” said llavelaar, “ 1 know enough.” And 
Verbrugge left. Havelaar went out and j)layed with little 
Max, whmn he kissed very fervently. When Madam 
Slotering was gone, he sent away the child, and called in 
Tine. 

“ Dear Tine ! I have a favour to ask you. I should 
like you and Max to go to Batavia : — to-day I accuse the 
liegent.” 

She fell on his neck, for the lirst time opposed to his 
wishes, and cried, sobbing — 



360 


MAX IIAVELAAK. 


“ No, Max; no, Max, I will not go ... I will not go ; 
we eat and drink together.” 

Was Havelaar wrong when he made out that she had as 
little right to blow her nose as the women at Arles ? 

He wrote and despatched the letter of which I here 
present a copy. After I have given a slight sketch of the 
circumstances under which that letter was written, I be- 
lieve that it is not necessary for me to show the circum- 
spection wliich he observed, while not uttering a syllable 
of the discovery just made, not to weaken his positive 
accusation by the uncertainty of a very important but as 
yet unproved accusation. His intention was to exhume 
the corpse of his predecessor, and to have it scientifically 
examined as soon as the Eegent should have been removed, 
and his party made harmless ; but as I have already said, 
he was not allowed the opportunity of doing this. 

In the copies of official documents — copies which strictly 
conform with the originals — I think I may use single pro- 
nouns instead of the foolish titles. I expect that the good 
taste of my readers will approve of this change. 


No. 88. 


Private. 

Immediate, 


“ Rankas-Betong, ^Uh February 1856. 


‘‘ To tlie Resident of Bantam, 

“ Since returning a month ago to my duties here, I have 
occupied myself principally in examining how the chiefs 



MAX IIAVELAAR. 


361 


discharge their obligations towards the population as 
'' regards statute-labour, poondootan,' and suchlike. 

“ I very soon discovered that the Eegent, on his own 
‘‘ responsibility, and for his advantage, summoned the 
“ population to work for him, far above the legally autho- 
'' rized number of pantjens or kemits.^ 

“ I hesitated between the choice of sending at once an 
'' official report and the desire to make this native func- 
tionary change his policy by gentle means, or even 
afterwards by threats, in order to attain the double pur- 
pose of putting an end to abuse, and at the same time 
not acting too severely against this old servant of the 
“ Government, particularly considering the bad examples 
“ which, I believe, have often been sot before him ; and in 
connexion with the peculiar circumstance that he ex- 
pected a visit from two relations (the Eegents of Bombang 
and Tjandoer, at least of the latter, who, as I hear, is 
already coming with a large train), and he being thus 
“ more than usually in temptation — and with regard to 
“ the critical embarrassment of his pecuniary circum- 
“ stances, as it were obliged — to provide by unlawful 
“ means the necessary preparations for that visit. 


* Poondootan is the obtaining of provisions and goods under the pre- 
text of Government service. In tlie journeys of important personages 
invited by the Regent or district chiefs, all necessaries are supplied by 
the population, and that as often as required. 

* Followers and serving-peoide summoned to increase the pomp, and 
attend upon the chief or other personage. 



362 


MAX llAVELAAU. 


" All this made me incline to moderation, with regard to 
“ what had already happened, but not at all to indulgence 
“ for the future. 

“ I insisted upon the immediate cessation of every uii- 
“ lawful act. 

“ I made you acquainted with that previous experiment 
“ to induce the Regent by moderation to do his duty. 

“ Yet it is evident to me that he casts all to the winds 
“ with rude insolence ; and I feel bound to communicate 
“ to you in virtue of my official oath; 

“ That I accuse the Regent of Lebak, Radeen Adhipatti, 
" Karta Natta Negara, of abuse of power, by disposing 
“ unlawfully of the labour of his subordinates, and suspect 
“ him of extortion while exacting productions in natihrd, 
“ without payment, or for prices arbitrarily fixed : 

“ That I suspect, moreover, the Demang of Parang- 
“ Koodjang (the Regent’s son-in-law) of complicity in the 
“ above-mentioned abuses. 

“ In order conclusively to prove both these charges I 
“ take the liberty of proposing to you to order me — 

“1. To send the Regent of Lebak with the utmost speed 
" to Serang, and to take care that he shaU not have occa- 
“ sion, either before his departure or during the journey, 
“ to influence by coiTuption, or in any other way, the 
“ witnesses. I require, 

“ 2. Previously to take the Demang of Parang-Koodjang 
“ into custody. 

“ 3. To apply the same measure to such persons of 



MAX UAVELAAR. 


363 


“ inferior rank as, belonging to the family of the Regent, 
“ may be expected to mar the impartiality of the examiua- 
“ tion to be instituted. 

“ 4. To order that examination to take place ini- 
“ mediately, and to report circumstantially on the issue. 
“ I take the liberty of submitting to your consideration 
“ the advisability of countermanding the visit of the 
“ Regent of Tjanjar. 

“ Finally, I have the honour to give you, as one who 
“ knows the district of Lebak better than it is as yet 
“ possible for me to know it, the assurance that, from a 
“ political point of view, the strictly just treatment of this 
“ affair has no difficulty at all, and that I should be rather 
“ apprehensive if it was not cleared up, for I am informed 
“ that the poor man is, as a witness told me, ‘poessiny' 
“ (tired, sick, disgusted) of all tlie vexation he lias suffered, 
“ and that he has long sought relief. 

“ I have partly derived the strength to fulfil niy difficult 
“ duty in writing this letter, from the hope that I may be 
“ allowed in due time to bring forward one or two excuses 
“ for the old Regent, for whose position, though caused by 
“ his own fault, I nevertheless feel gi'eat compassion. — 
“ The Assistant Resident at Lebak, 

(Signed) “ Max Havelaae.” 

The next day the Resident of Bantam replied ? . . . . 
no, but “ Mr. Slymering ” did so, in a private letter. 

That reply is a precious contribution to the knowledge 



364 


MAX IIAVELAAK. 


of how the Government is carried on in Dutch India. Mr. 
Slymering complained “ that Havelaar had not first com- 
municated verbally to him the affair mentioned in the 
letter No. 88,” — of course because then there would have 
been more chance of "arrangimj” matters ; adding, more- 
over, that Havelaar “ disturbed him in pressing business !” 

The man was surely busy in writing the yearly report 
on TRANQUIL TRANQUILLITY .... 1 have that letter before 
me, and do not trust my eyes. I read once more the letter 
of the Assistant Eesident of Lebak .... I compare 
Havelaar and Slymering. •*♦*** 


This Shawlman is a low beggar. You must know, 
reader, that Bastianus is again very often absent from the 
office, because he has gout. Now, as I cannot reconcile it 
with my conscience to throw away the funds of the firm 
(Last and Co.)— for. where principles are concerned, I am 
immoveable. I thouglit'the day before yesterday that 
Shawlman wrote a good hand, and, as he looked so very 
poor, that he could therefore certainly be got for small 
wages. I therefore thought that it was my duty to pro- 
vide in the cheapest manner for the removal of Bastianus. 
I went accordingly to Shawlman’s house in the Lange 
Leidsche Dwarsstraat.^ The woman of the shop was at 
the door, but she seemed not to recognise me, though I 

* Long Leiden Cross-street. 



MAX ITAVELAAE. 


365 


had lately told her that I was Mr. Drystiihble, cofTee- 
broker, of the Laiirier Canal. There is always a sort of 
insult in such a non-recognition ; but as it was now not 
so cold, and as I wore last time I was there my coat 
trimmed with fur, I ascribed it to that, and think notliing 
of it — I mean the insult. I said therefore again that I 
was Mr. Drystubble, of the Laurior Canal, coffee-broker, 
and begged her to go and see if Shawlman was in, because 
I did not wish, as on the last occasion, to have to speak to 
his wife, who is always discontented. But the woman 
refused to go up-stairs. ‘‘ She could not walk up and 
down stairs the whole day for that beggarly fomily,'' said 
she, ‘‘but I could go and look for myself.’' And then 
followed again a description of the staircase and doors, 
which I had no need of ; for I always know a place where 
I have been once, because I pay such attention to every- 
thing. I have got accustomed to that in my business. So 
I went up stairs, and knocked at the well-known door, 
which opened. I entered, and as I saw nobody in the 
room, I looked round. There was not much to bo seen. 
A child's trousers with an embroidered stripe hung over a 
chair — why need such people wear embroidered trousers ? 

In a corner stood a not very heavy travelling box, which 
I lifted up by the hinge, and on the mantel-piece there 
were some books, which I looked at. A curious collection! 
A couple of volumes of Byron, Horace, Bastiat, Beranger, 
and, ... do guess I ... a Bible, a complete Bible, with 



366 


MAX IIAVKLAAH. 


the Apocrypha. This I had not expected of Sliawlinan. 
It appeared also to have been read, for I found many notes 
on loose pieces of paper relating to the Scriptures, all 
written in the same handwriting as the pieces in tliat un- 
welcome parcel. Above all he seemed to have studied 
carefully the Book of Job, for there the leaves bore the 
marks of it. I think that he begins to feel the chastise- 
ment of the Lord, and will therefore reconcile himself to 
God by reading tlie Holy Scriptures, and I am not opposed 
to tliat. But while waiting, my eye caught sight of a 
lady’s work-box which stood on the table. Without think- 
ing about it, I looked at it : there were in it a pair of half- 
finished child’s stockings, a lot of foolish verses, and a 
letter addressed to Shawlman’s wife, as could be seen by 
the inscription. The letter was open, and it seemed as if 
it had been rumpled with some anger. Now it is a firm 
principle with me never to read anything that is not 
addressed to mo, because I do not think it respectable. I 
never do such a tiling when I have no interest in it; — but 
now I got an inspiration that it was my duty to read this 
letter, because the contents would perliaps further me in 
the humane intentions that made me go to Shawlman. I 
thought about it, how the Lord is always near to those 
who believe in Him, as He gave me here quite unex- 
pectedly an opportunity to know a little more about this 
man, and protected me too from the danger of performing 
an act of charity to an immoral person. 



MAX HAVELAAR. 


367 


I pay niucli attention to such directions of the Lord : — 
this has done me a great deal of good in business. With 
much surprise I saw that the wife of Sliawlman belongs to 
a respectable family ; the letter at least was signed by a 
relation whose name in Holland is respected, and I was 
indeed in ecstasies with the beautiful contents of those 
lines. It appeared to be from a person who laboured 
zealously for the Lord; for he wrote that the wife of 
Sliawlman ought to be divorced from such a wretch, who 
made her suffer poverty, — who could not earn his liveli- 
hood, who was, moreover, a rascal, because he had debts. 
That the writer of the letter pitied her condition, though 
that condition was her own fault, because she had for- 
saken the Lord, and stuck to Sliawlman ; — that she ought 
to return to the Lord, and that in that case her family 
would all of them assist her, and furnish her wdth needle- 
work, but before all things she ought to put away this 
Sliawlman, who was a disgrace to the family. 

In a word, you could not get in church itself more piety 
than was to be found in this letter. 

I knew enough, and was grateful to have been warned 
in such a miraculous way. Without this warning I should 
certainly have become a victim of my own good heart. I 
resolved, therefore, again to keep Bastianus tiU I could 
find a fitter person to take his place ; for I do not like to 
turn any one to the streets. 

The reader will be curious to know how I got on at the 



368 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


Eoserneyers’ last party. I was not there, .... wonderful 
things have happened ! I had gone to Driebergen with my 
wife and Mary. My father-in-law, old Mr. Last, the son 
of the first Last (the Meyers were then still in the firm, but 
they have left it long ago), said some years ago that he 
should like to see my wife and Mary. Now, it was very 
fine weather, and my fear of the love-history with which 
Stern had menaced us, made me think all at once of this 
invitation. I spoke of it to our bookkeeper, who is a man 
of experience, and who, after mature deliberation, recom- 
mended me to sleep a night on it. This I intended imme- 
diately to carry out, for I am quick in the execution of 
my decisions. The following day I perceived already how 
wise this advice was, for during the night I got the idea 
that I could not do better than delay my decision till 
Friday. In a word, after having carefully considered all 
things, — there was much in favour of the plan, but also 
much against it, — we went on Saturday afternoon, and 
came back on Monday morning. I would not tell you all 
this, if it was not in connexion with my book. 

First of all I think it necessary that you should know 
why I do not protest against the nonsense which Stern 
certainly brought out last Sunday. (What nonsense is 
that about a person who would hear when he was dead ? 
Mary mentioned it to mo: she had heard it from the 
Eosemeyers — who trade in sugar;) secondly, because I 
am now again convinced that all those stories about misery 



MAX HAVELAAK. 


369 


and trouble in the East Indies are downright lies. Thus 
it may be seen how travelling gives a person the oj^por- 
tiinity to penetrate deeply into affairs. 

Saturday evening, for instance, my father-in-law liad 
accepted an invitation from a gentleman, wlio had been 
formerly a Eesident in the East Indies, and who lives now 
at a large country-seat. We went there, and, indeed, 1 
cannot sufficiently praise the excellent rece 2 )tion we met 
with. Our host sent his carriage to fetch us, and tlie 
coachman had on a red waistcoat. Now it was certainly 
a little too cold to inspect the country-seat, which must 
1)6 magnificent in the summer, but in the house itself 
there was nothing to desire ; for it was replete with 
luxury: a billiard-room, a library, a covered iron and 
glass conservatory, and a cockatoo on a silver perch. 1 
never saw sucli a thing. I made the observation, how 
good conduct is always rewarded ; that that man had been 
attentive to his business was evident, for he had more 
tlian three orders of knighthood, lie had a beautiful 
country-seat, and, moreover, a house in Amsterdam. At 
the supper all was trvffe, and even the servants who waited 
at table wore red waistcoats, like the coachman. 

As I take great interest in Indian affairs, because of the 
coffee, I began a conversation on the subject, and per- 
(‘eived very soon what I had to think about it. This 
Resident told me that he was always very well off in the 
East Indies, and that there was, therefore, not a word of 



370 


MAX irAVELAAK. 


truth in those stories of discontent among the population. 
I turned the conversation upon Shawlman. He knew 
him, and that unfavourably. He said that the Govern 
ment liad done well in dismissing him, for that this 
Shawlman was a very discontented person, who made 
remarks about everything, and there was, moreover, much 
to disapprove in his own conduct. For instance, he was 
always running away with girls, and bringing them home 
openly before liis wife; lie did not pay his debts, a thing 
which is very unseemly. As I knew so exactly from tlie 
l(^tter I had read how well-founded this accusation was, 
1 was very well pleased to find that I had judged of all 
so correctly, and was quite satisfied with myself. I am 
also known for this at the Exchange — T mean for always 
possessing a sound judgment. 

This llesident and his wife were agreeable and kind. 
They told us much of their manner of life in the Indies : 
it must be very pleasant there. They sard that their 
country-seat near Driebergen was not lialf so large as 
what they called their ‘‘grounds,” in the interior of Java, 
and tliat a hundred men were required to keep it in order. 
But — and this is a proof how they were liked— all this 
was done for nothing, and out of pure attachment. They 
told us also, that when they went away the sale of their 
furniture had xu’oduced a large profit, as it fetched ten 
times its value ; for that the native chiefs were all of 
them so fond of buying a keepsake of a liesidont. I told 



MAX HAVELAAR. 


371 


this afterwards to Stern, who maintained that this was 
done by coercion, and that he could prove it out of Shawl- 
man’s parcel ; but I told him that this Shawlman was a 
slanderer, — that he had run away with girls, like that young 
(jerman at Busselinck and Waterman’s, — that I did not 
attach the least value to his judgment, for that I had now 
learnt from a Eesident himself how matters stood, and 
liad therefore nothing to learn from Shawlman. 

There were still more persons from the Indies, amongst 
others a very rich gentleman, wlio had gained much money 
on tea, which the Javanese made him for little money, 
and which the Government bought from him for a higli 
price, to encourage the activity of the Javanese. This 
gentleman was also very angry with all those discontented 
persons, who are always speaking and writing against 
the Government. He could not say enough in praise of 
tlie government of the Colonies ; for he said that he had 
the conviction that it lost a great deal in tea, which it 
bought from him, and that was therefore very generous in 
invariably paying such a high price for an article, intrin- 
sically of little value, which he liimself did not like, for 
he always drank Chinese tea. He said also, that th(‘ 
Governor-General, who liad prolonged the so-called tea- 
contracts, notwithstanding tlie calculation that tlie nation 
lost so much on this, such a clever, good man was he, and, 
above all, a good friend of those who had known him 
formerly; for that tliis Cfovernor-General had not paid 



372 


MAX HAVELAAK. 


the least attention to the talk about losses on the tea, and 
had done him tlierefore a great deal of good by not can- 
celling those tea-contracts. ''Yes,” he went on, “ray 
heart bleeds, when I perceive that such noble persons 
are slandered : if he had not been there, I should have to 
walk with my wife and children.” Thereupon he ordered 
his carriage, and it looked so magnificent, and the horses 
were so beautiful and so fat, that I can understand why 
lie is full of gratitude to such a Governor-General. It 
does one’s heart good to behold such charming emotions, 
above all when comparing them with that accurs(jti 
grumbling and complaining of persons like that Shawl- 
man. 

The following day, the Kesident and that gentleman 
for whom the Javanese make tea, returned our visit. 

Both of them at once asked us by what train we thought 
of going to Amsterdam. We did not know what this 
meant, but aftenwards it was clear to us, for when wo 
aiTived there on Monday morning, there were two servants 
at the station, one with a red waistcoat, and one with a 
yellow one, who both at the same time told us that 
he had received an order by telegram, to fetch us in 
carriage. My wife was confused, and I thought what 
would Busselinck and Waterman have said if they had 

seen that, 1 mean that there were two carriages for us. 

But it was not easy to make a choice, for I could not 
resolve to hurt one of the parties by refusing such a nice 



MAX IIAVELAAR. 


373 


offer. Good advice was dear ; but I came victorious out 
of this great difficulty. I put my wife and Mary in the 

red carriage, the red waistcoat I mean and I went in 

tlie yellow one, 1 mean the carriage. 

How those horses tore along ! on the Weesper Street 
where it is always so dirty, the mud flew as high as the 
houses, and there I saw the miserable Shawlman, his back 

bent, his head bowed down and I saw how he tried to 

wipe the mud off his pale face with the sleeve of his 
threadbare coat. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

[composed by stekn.] 

In the private letter which Mr. Slymeriiig sent to 
Havelaar, he coinnmnicated to him, that he, notwithstand- 
ing liis pressing business, would come the next day to 
llankas-Eetong, to deliberate on what ought to be done. 
Havelaar, who knew what such a deliberation meant — his 
predecessor had so often deliberated with the Resident of 

Bantam wrot(i the following letter, which he sent to 

meet the Resident, and be read by him before his arrival 
at 1 jcbak : - 


No. \)l. 


Private. 

Immediate. 


“ Kankas Bei'Oxg, 
^2 mFeh . 1856, 11 p.m. 


“ Yesterday at 1 2 o’clock, I had the honour to send 
“ you my missive {ImmediatCy No. 88) containing in 
“ substance, 

'‘That I, after a long investigation, and after having 
‘ tried in vain to bring back by moderation the party con- 



MAX IIAVELAAH. 


375 


“ ceriied from liis perversity, felt myself obliged by my 
“ official oath to accuse the Eegent of Lebak of abuse of 
“ power, and to add that I sxis'peciccl him of extortion. T 
have taken the liberty to propose to you in that letter, 
to summon that native chief to Serang, in order to ex- 
“ amine after his departure, and after the corrupting 
“ influence of his extensive family had been neutralized, 
“ whether my accusation and sus 2 )icion wei"e well founded. 

“ Long, or to speak more accurately, much have I re 
“ fleeted before determining upon this. 

I took care to let you know that I have endeavoured, 
“ by exhortation and threats, to save the old Eegent from 
“ misfortune and shame, and myself from the dee2> regret 
“ of having been the immediate cause of his troubles. 

But on the other hand, I saw the [for many years) 
“ pkindcred and much 02y7vesscd 2 ) 02 )ulation. I thoiight of 
“ the necessity of an exaniide — for I shall have to re^iort 
“ to you many more vexations ^ — if, at least this affair, by 
'' its reaction makes no end of them, — and, I repeat it, 
“ after mature consideration, I did what I thought to be 
“ my duty. 

“ I have just received your kind and esteemed juivatc 
“ letter communicating that you will come here to-moiTow, 
and at the same time a hint that I ought to have treated 
“ this affair privately at fimt. To-morrow I shall therefore 
have the honour to see you, and it is exactly on that 
'' account that T have taken the liberty to send you this 



376 


MAX IIAVKLAAK. 


“ letter, to add, before our meeting, the following consi 
“ derations : — 

“ All my investigations about the Eegent were (juite 
“ secret ; only he and the Patteh (Adjutant of the Eegeiit) 

knew it, for I myself had frankly warned him. Even the 
“ Controller knows only a part of my investigations. This 
“ secrecy had a double aim. At first when I still hoped to 
“ bring back the Regent to the right way, it was my object 
''if I succeeded not to compromise him. The Patteh 
" tlianked mo in the name of the Eegent for this discretion. 
" (It was on the 12th iiist.) But afterwards when I began 
" to despair of the success of my endeavours, — or rather, 
“ when the measure of my indignation overflowed on hear- 
" ing of a recent occurrence ; — when a longer silence woulil 
“ liave become 'participation as an accomplice — then that 
" secrecy woidd have been to 'tmj advantage ; for I too liave 
" to fulfil duties towards my household and myself. 

" Por after writing my letter of yesterday, I should bo 
“ unworthy to serve the Government, if what I wrote down 
“ then was vain, unfounded, or invented. And would or 
" will it be possible to me to prove that I have done ichai 
*' a good Assistant Resident ought to do — to prove that I am 
" not unworthy the functions which I have received to 
“ prove that I do not risk thoughtlessly and rashly my seven 

teen hard years in tlie service of the Government, and, 
“ what is of more importance still, the interest of wife and 
“ child — will it be possible for me to prove all this, unless 



MAX HAVEL.VAK. 


377 


“ deep secrecy does not hide my investigations, and pre- 
“ vent the criminal from concealing himself ? 

At the least suspicion the Eegent would send an ex- 
“ press to his nephew, who is coming here, and whose 
“ interest it is to maintain him, at any sacrifice, and to 
distribute money with a profuse hand to every one 
“ whom he had recently swindled, the consequence 
would he (I need not say will be) that I have passed a 
“ rash judgment, and am an unserviceable functionary, 
“ not to say worse. 

“ To prevent that result I write this letter. I have the 
“ highest esteem for you ; but I know the spirit of East 
“ Indian functionaries, and 1 do not possess that spirit. 

Your hint that it would have been better to have 
“ treated the affair privately at first, makes me apprehen- 
“ sive of such a course. What I said in my missive of 
“ yesterday is true; but j)erhaps it would sceiu untrue if 
“ the affair was treated in sucli a manner as would reveal 
“ my accusation and suspicion IjcforG the removal of the 
“ Regent. I may not conceal from you that even your 
“ unexpected arrival in connexioji with tlie express sent 
“ by me yesterday to Serang, gives me reason to fear that 
“ the accused, who would not listen to my exhortations, 
“ will now awake too soon, and endeavour, if possible, tant 
“ soit ;peu to exculpate himself. 

“ I have the honour to say that I still refer literally to 
“ my missive of yesterday ; but 1 take the liberty to 



378 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


observe that this missive contained a proposal to reinovo 
“ the Regent before the investigation, and previously to 
“ make his adherents Iiarmless ; and at the same time that 
“ I believe myself to be no further responsible for what J 
advanced, than so far as you may be pleased to agree to 
“ my proposition as regards the manner of investigation — 
that it should be impartial, open, and above all,/m\ 

“ This liberty cannot exist before the removal of tlie 
“ Regent ; and according to my humble opinion, there is 
“ nothing dangerous in that ; as he can be told that / 
“ accuse him and suspect him, that I am in danger, and 
“ not he, in the event of his innocence being established: — 
“ for I myself am of opinion that I ought to be dismissed, if 
“ it shall appear that I have acted precipitately or rashly. 

Precipitately ! . . . After years and years of abuses ! 

Rashly ! ... as if an honest man could sleep, and live, 
and enjoy, while they, over whose welfare he is called 
“ upon to watch, who are in the highest sense his neiyh- 
hours, suffer extortion and injustice ! 

'' I have been here, it is true, but a short time. I hope, 
‘‘ however, that the question will for once be, what has 
been done, if anything has been well done, and not 
“ whether it has been done in too short a time. For me, 
“ every moment is too long, when characterized by extor- 
tion and oppression, and every second weighs heavy on 
“ me that is passed in misery by yny negligence, by my 
“ ‘ spirit of arranging.’ 



MAX HAVELAAK. 


379 


“ I regret the days which I allowed to pass away before 
“ reporting to you officially, and I apologize for that 
neglect. 

“ I have taken the liberty to request you to give me the 
“ opportunity to justify my letter of yesterday, and to 
guarantee me against the miscarriage of my endeavours 
“ to free the province of Lebak from the worms which 
have gnawed, since the memory of man, at its welfare. 

'' It is therefore that I have again taken the liberty of 
“ asking you to approve my action, which consists only of 
mvestigatingy reporting, and propomig to remove the Ee- 
“ gent of Lebak, without direct or indirect notice before- 
“ hand ; and moreover to order an investigation to take 
place of what 1 communicated in my letter of yesterday, 
“ No. 88. — The Assistant Eesident of Lebak, 

(Signed) Max IIavelaaii.” 

This request, not to take the criminals under his protec- 
tion, the Eesident received on the way. An hour after 
his arrival at Eankas-Betong, he paid a visit to the Eegent, 
and asked him whether he could say anything to the 
prejudice of the Assistant Eesident,” and whether he, the 
Regent, “ wanted money,” To the first question the Ee- 
gent replied, I have nothing against him ! I can solemnly 
swear to that ! ” The second question he answered in the 
affirmative, whereupon the Eesident gave him a couple of 
bank-notes. 



380 


MAX HAVELAAK. 


It may be understood that Havelaar knew nothing of 
this. We shall see by and by how he became acquainted 
with so shameful a transaction. 

When the Resident Slymcring entered Havelaar’s house, 
he was paler than usual, and the intervals between his 
words were longer than ever. It was indeed no small 
thing for a person who so excelled in arranging and making 
out the yearly reports of tranquillity,'’ to receive so unex- 
pectedly letters in which there was no trace either of 
optimism or of artificial colouring, or of fear of the disap- 
probation of the Government. 

The Ilesident of Bantam was in a fright ; and if I may 
be forgiven the ignoble comparison for the sake of exact- 
ness, I feel inclined to liken him to a little street-boy who 
complains of the violation of old customs, because he has 
l3een beaten without previous abusive language. 

lie began by asking the Controller why tlie latter had 
not endeavoured to restrain Havelaar from his accusation ? 
Poor Verbrugge, who was entirely unacquainted with the 
circumstances, said so, but was not believed. Mr. Slymer- 
ing could not believe that any person without assistances 
could do his duty in such a manner. As Verbrugge, how- 
ever, maintained his ignorance, the Eesident began to read 
Havelaar's letters. 

What Verbrugge suffered in listening is indescribable. 
He was an honest man, and would not have lied if Have 
laar had appealed to him to confirm the truth of the 



MAX HAVELAAK. 


,381 


contents of these letters. But even without that honesty, 
lie had not always been able to avoid the truth in 
many written reports, even where it was dangerous to 
tell it. How would it be if Havelaar made use of those 
reports ? 

After having read these letters, the Kesident said that, 
if Havelaar chose to recall these documents, it would be 
agreeable to Mm to consider them as not written, which 
Havelaar firmly but politely refused. 

Having in vain tried to move him to this, the Eesident 
said that he must investigate the charges, and that he had 
therefore to request Havelaar to summon the witnesses in 
support of the accusation he had brought against the 
Eegent. 

Ye poor creatures, whose sides had been wounded by 
the thorns in the ravine, how anxiously would your hearts 
have beaten if you could have heard this request ! 

And you, poor Verbrugge, you first witness, chief wit- 
ness, ex officio witness, a witness in virtue of office and 
oath, a witness who had already borne witness on paper, 
which lay there on the talile under Havelaar*s hand ! . . . . 

Havelaar replied 

‘‘ Mr. Eesident, — I am Assistant Eesident of Lebak ; I 
have promised to protect the population from extortion 
and tyranny ; I accuse the Eegent and his son-in-law ot 
Parang-Koodjang ; I will prove my accusation as soon 
as that opportunity is given me, which I proposed in 



382 


MAX HAVELAAll. 


my letters. I am guilty of slander if this accusation is 
false!" 

How freely Verbrugge breathed again ! 

And how strange the Eesident thought Havelaar's 
words. 

The conversation lasted long. With politeness,— for 
Slymering was polite and well-bred, — he urged Havelaar 
to turn aside from such wrong principles ; but with as 
much politeness the latter remained immoveable. The 
result was, that the Eesident had to yield, in saying as a 
threat, what was to Havelaar a victory, that he should be 
compelled to bring the matter under the notice of the 
Government. 

The meeting was ended. The Eesident paid the visit to 
the Eegent, to put to him the questions already mentioned, 
and then dined at the scanty board of the Havelaars, after 

which he returned in great haste to Serang, “ because 

he ^liad still so ^ni u ch to do." 

The next day Havelaar received a letter from the Eesi 
dent of Bantam, the contents of which may be understood 
from the reply, of which I here give a copy : — 

'' No. 93. — Private, 

“ Rankas-Betong, 28^/i February 1850. 

I have had the honour to receive your missive of the 
'' 26th inst. (La. 0, i)rivate), containing mainly the fol- 
'' lowing : — 



MAX HAVELAAli. 


383 


That you had reasons for not accepting the proposals 
“ made in both my official letters of the 24th and 25tli 
inst., Nos. 88 and 91 ; 

“ That you had desired a previous confidential comniu- 
nication ; 

That you do not approve of my transactions described 
ill both those letters ; 

And lastly, some orders. 

I have now the honour again to assert, as I did ver 
“ bally in the meeting of the day before yesterday : — 

That I fully respect the legality of your power as re 
“ gards deciding whether to accept my proposition or 
'' not : — 

That the orders received shall with exactness be 
“ obeyed — with self-sacrifice, if need be, as if you were 
“ present to witness all 1 do or say, or, more properly, all 
“ 1 do not do or do not say. 

1 know that you place confidence in my good faith in 
“ this matter. 

But I take the liberty solemnly to protest against the 
“ least semblance of disapprobation of any action, any 
word, any phrase, done, spoken, or written by me in this 
“ matter. I am convinced that I have done my duty : — 
“ in my object and in the manner of executing it quite my 
;—nothin(j hut my duty, without the least deviation. 
'' I have long pondered before acting (that is : before 
examining, rej^orting, pro^iosing), and if I have been 



384 


MAX HAVELAAK. 


to a certain extent mistaken in anything, — my fault was 
'' not precipitancy. 

“ In the same circumstances I should do again ^yet 

'' a little quicker exactly, exactly the same. 

Even if it happened that a higher power than yours 
“ disapproved anything which I did, — (except perhaps tlie 
“ peculiarity of my style, which is a part of myself, a de- 
feet for which I am as little responsible as a stammerer 
'' for his defect ;) — even if that happened .... but no, 
'' that cannot be, even if it were so, .... 1 have doiu^ 
‘‘ my DUTY. 

'' Certainly I am sorry- >-yet without being astonished, 
'' — that you judge differently of this ; and as far as re- 
gards myself, I should rely upon what appears to me to 

'' be a slight but there is a question about a princijplc, 

and I have conscientious reasons which require that it 
shall be decided which opinion is correct, yours or mine. 
“'Serve otherwise than I served at Lebak, I cannot. 

“If the Government desires to be served otherwise, then 
“ I shall be obliged as an honest man to ask the Government 
“ to discharge me ; — then I must endeavour, at the age of 
“ thirty-six years, to commence a new career ; — then I, 
“ after seventeen years, after seventeen heavy difficult 
“ years of service as a functionary, after having devoted 
“ the best of my lifetime to what I considered to be my 
“ duty, then I must again ask society for bread, if it will 
“ give me bread, for my wife and child— bread in exchange 



MAX HAVELAAR. 


385 


for thoughts — bread perhaps in exchange for labour with 
spade or wheelbarrow, if the strength of my arm is ap- 
" proved more tlian that of my soul. 

But I cannot and will not believe that your opinion is 
shared by his Excellency the Governor-General, and I 
“ am therefore compelled, before I pass to the bitter ex- 
“ trerne of what I wrote in the last paragraph, to beg you 
“ respectfully to propose to the Government : 

“ To order the Kesident of Bantam to approve so far the 
“ transactions of the Assistant Kesident of Lebak, including 
" his letters of the 24th and 25th inst.. Nos. 88 and 91 ; — 

Or: 

To call the above-mentioned Assistant Resident to 
account on the points of disapprobation to be given by 
'' the Resident of Bantam. 

I have, finally, the honour to give you the grateful 
“ assurance that if anything could bring me back from my 
long calculated, and calm but fervently adhered to prin- 
“ ciples in this, — it would have been indeed the polite, 
“ engaging manner in which you, at the meeting of the 
day before yesterday, opposed those principles. — The 
“ Assistant Resident of Lebak, 

(Signed) Max Havelaar ” 

Without deciding as to the correctness of the suspicions 
of Slotering’s widow, concerning the cause which made 
her children orphans, and only accepting what may be 

2 B 



386 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


proved, that there was a strong connexion in Lebak 
between fulfilment of duty and poison — even if that 
connexion existed only in public opinion — yet it may be 
conceived, that Max and Tine passed sorrowful days after 
the visit of the Eesident. I believe that I need not paint 
the anguish of a mother, who, when offering food to her 
child, has continually to ask whether she is not perhaps 
murdering her darling ? 

And certainly little Max was an adored child,” who 
had stayed away seven years after the marriage, as if the 
rogue knew that it was no advantage to come into the 
world as the son of such parents. 

Twenty-nine long days had Havelaar to wait before the 
Governor-General communicated with him, .... 

But we are not yet so far. 

A short time after the vain endeavour to move Havelaar 
to withdraw, his letters, or to betray the poor people who 
had confided in his magnanimity, Verbrugge entered 
Havelaar’s house. The good man was deadly pale, and 
had some difficulty in speaking. 

I have been with the Kegent,” he said ; “ it is scan- 
dalous, . . . but do not betray me !” 

What ? What must I not betray ? ” 

" Do you pledge me your word to make no use of what 
I shall tell you 

“ More halfness'' said Havelaar ; “ but well ! I pledge 
my word.” 



MAX HAVELAAR. 


387 


And then Verbnigge told Havelaar what the reader 
knows already,— that the Eesident had asked the Regent, 
if the latter could say anything against the Assistant Resi- 
dent, and had quite unexpectedly given him money. At 
the same time Verbrugge knew it from the Regent himself, 
who had asked him what reasons the Resident could have 
had for this. 

Havelaar was indignant, but he had pledged his 
word. 

The next day Verbrugge returned and said that Duclari 
had told him how ignoble it was to leave Havelaar, who 
had to fight such opponents, so completely alone, where- 
upon Verbrugge released him from his pledge. 

Very well,” said Havelaar, write it down.” 

Verbrugge wrote it down. This declaration is likewise 
before me. 

The reader will have long understood why I renounced 
so cheaply any pretensions to authenticity in the history 
of Saidjah. 

It was touching to observe how Verbrugge — timorous 
before he was awakened by the reproaches of Duclari — 
dared to trust Havelaar’s pledged word, in a matter which 
so induced violation of it ! 

And another thing. Years have passed since the events 
which I relate. Havelaar lias suffered much during this 
time, he has seen the suffering of his household — the 
documents which lie before me bear witness of this, and it 



388 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


seems that he has waited. ... I give the following note 
from his hand : — “ I read in the newspapers that Mr. 
Slymering has been made Knight of the Order of the 
Dutch Lion. He appears to be now Eesident of Djocjo- 
carta. I can therefore now speak of the affairs of Lehak 
without danger to Verhrugge/’ 



CHAPTEE XX. 

[composed by stern.] 

It was evening. Tine was reading in the inner gallery ; 
and Havelaar was drawing an embroidery pattern ; little 
Max was putting together a puzzle picture, and was 
getting angry because he could not find that red lady’s 
body. 

''Will it be right so, Tine?” asked Havelaar. "See, 
I have made this palm a little larger ... it is exactly 
Hogarth’s line of beauty.” 

" Yes, Max ! but these lace-holes are too near each 
other.” 

“ Are they ? And the others ?” 

" Max ! do let me see your trousers, . . . have you that 
stripe ? ” 

" Ah ! I remember where you embroidered that. Tine !” 

" Xot I — where then ?” 

“ It was at the Hague, when Max was ill, and we were 
so frightened because the physician said that he had such 
an uncommonly shaped head, and that so much care was 



390 


MAX HAVELAAK. 


required to prevent congestion of the brain . . . then you 
were busy with that stripe.” 

Tine went and kissed the little one. 

I have found her stomach, I have found her stomach !” 
cried the little boy gaily ; and the red lady was complete. 

Whose bedtime is it ?” asked the mother. 

“ Mine ; but I have not yet supped,” said little Max. 

‘‘ You shall have some supper first of course.” 

And she rose up, and gave him his simple supper, which 
she seemed to have fetched out of a well-secured cup- 
board in her room ; for the noise of many locks had been 
heard. 

What are you giving him ? ” asked Ilavelaar. 

Oh, don’t be uneasy ! It is biscuit out of the tin box 
from Batavia, and the sugar too has bqen kept under lock 
and key.” 

Havelaar’s thoughts turned again to the point where 
they had been interrupted. 

Do you know,” he continued, “ that we have not yet 
paid that doctor’s bill ? . . .” 

Oh ! that is very hard ! ” 

Dear Max, we live so economically here, we shall soon 
be able to pay all : moreover, you will certainly soon be 
appointed Eesident, and then all will be arranged in a 
little time.” 

“ That is exactly the thing that makes me sad,” said 
Havelaar. “ I should be so unwilling to leave Lebak. . . . 



MAX HAVELAAK. 


391 


I will explain that to you. Don't you believe that we 
loved our Max more after his illness ? Now, it appears 
to me that I shall love poor Lebak still more, after it 
has recovered from the cancer from which it has suffered 
for so many years. The thought of promotion frightens 
me, and yet on the other side, when I think again that 
we have debts. . . 

'' All will be right, Max ! even if you had to go from 
here, then you could help Lebak afterwards on being made 
Governor-General.” 

Then came wild lines in Havelaar’s pattern there 

was anger in those flowers, . . . those strips were sharp, 
angular, crossing each other. . . . Tine understood that she 
had said something wrong. 

'' Dear Max !” she began kindly. 

" A curse on it ! . . . Will you have them starve so 
long ? , . . . Can you live on sand V* 

“Dear Max! ...” 

But he jumped up from his chair, and there was no 
more drawing that evening. 

He went up and down in the inner gallery, and at last 
he spoke in a tone which would Iiave sounded rough and 
hard to every stranger, but which was thought of quite 
differently by Tine. 

“ A curse on this indifference, this shameful indifference 1 
Here I have waited a month for justice, and meanwhile 
the poor people are suffering terribly. The Eegent seems 



392 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


to calculate upon nobody daring to take it up against him 
—look . . . . " 

He went into liis office, and came back with a letter in 
his han a letter which lies before me, reader ! 

Look, in this letter, he dares to make me proposals 
about the kind of labour which he intends to have done 
by men whom he has summoned unlawfully .... is not 
that shamelessness going too far ? And do you know who 
these persons are ? They are women with little children, 
with sucklings ; women who are pregnant, who have been 
driven from Parang-Koodjang to the capital, to work for 

him there are no more men ! And they have nothing 

to eat, and they sleep on the road, and eat sand .... Can 
you eat sand ? Must they eat sand till I am Governor- 
General ? 

« Curse it ! .... ” 

Tine knew very well with whom alone Max was angry, 
when he spoke thus to her whom he loved. 

" And,” continued Havelaar, “ that is all on my respon- 
sibility. If at this moment some of these poor creatures 
are wandering there outside, and seeing the light of our 
lamps, will say : ‘ There lives the wretch who ought to 
protect us ; there he sits quietly with wife and child, and 
draws embroidery patterns, while we lie here like dogs on 
the road, and starve with our children V Yes, I hear it, 
1 hear it ; that cry for vengeance upon iny head ! . . . . 
here, Max, here !....” 



MAX HAVELAAR. 


393 


And he kissed the child with a wildness which 
frightened it. 

My child, if they tell you that I am a wretch, who 
had no courage to do justice, that so many mothers have 
died by my fault ; if they tell you that the neglect of your 
father stole away the bliss of your life .... Max, bear 
witness how I suffered 

And he burst into tears, which Tine kissed away. Then 
she put little Max to bed — a mat of straw — and when she 
returned found Havelaar in conversation with Verbrugge 
and Duclari, who had just come in. The conversation 
was about the expected decision of the Government. 

I understand very well that the Resident is in a 
difficult position,’' said Duclari. He cannot advise the 
Government to accept your proposals, for then too much 
would be brought to light. I have been long in Bantam, 
and know much about it, — more than you, Mr. Havelaar ! 
I was here as sub-lieutenant, and in that position one 
hears things that the native does not dare to tell the func- 
tionaries. But if now, after an open investigation, all 
this comes to light, the Governor-General will summon 
the Resident to account for it, and ask him how it is that 
he has not discovered in two years what was obvious 
to you immediately? He must, therefore, prevent that 
investigation. 

“ I have considered that,” replied Havelaar, '' and put 
on my guard by his endeavours to move the Regent to 



394 


MAX HAVELAAE. 


say something against me, which seems to show that he 
will try to remove the question, for instance, by accusing 
me of .... I know not what; I have covered myself 
against that by sending copies of my letters direct to the 
Government. In one of these letters, I beg to bo called 
to account, if perhaps it should be pretended that I had 
done something wrong. If, now, the Eesident of Bantam 
attacks me, no decision can be made, according to justice, 
before I have been heard — ^that is allowed even to a 
criminal — and I have done nothing wrong. ...” 

" There is the post !” said Verbrugge. 

Yes, it was the post ! — the post that brought the follow- 
ing letter from the Governor- General of the Dutch Indies 
to Havelaar, late Assistant Eesident of Lebak : — 

Official, No. 54. „ guj^j-ENZORO, 23 rf March 1856 . 

“ The manner in which you have acted on the discovery 
" or supposition of wrong-doing on the part of the chiefs 
" in the district of Lebak, and your attitude towards your 
“ superior, the Eesident of Bantam, have excited, in a high 
“ degree, my displeasure. In your acts there is not only 
“ a want of the deliberate judgment, caution, and prudence 
“ so indispensable to a functionary intrusted with power 
“ in the interior of Java (sic), but also notions of insubor- 
“ dination to your immediate superior. Only a few days 
" after your appointment to your present office, you made 
“ the head of the native Government of Lebak the subject 



MAX HAVELAAR. 


395 


“ of irritating examinations, without first consulting (sic) the 
Eesident. In these examinations you found cause, with- 
“ out substantiating your accusations against that chief 
by facts (sic), much less by proofs, to make proposals 
“ which tended to subject a native functionary of the rank 
'' of the Eegent of Lebak (a man of sixty years, but still 
“ a zealous servant, related to neighbouring influential 
Eegents, and of whom favourable testimony has always 
“ been given) to a morally quite annihilating treatment. 
“ Moreover, you have, when the Eesident did not feel 
'' inclined to give his consent to your proposals, refused to 
satisfy the just desire of your superior, that you should 
“ say openly what you knew of the actions of the native 
“ Government of Lebak. 

Such conduct merits all disapprobation, and sanctions 
“ belief in your incapacity to bear office in the interior 
Government of Java. I am therefore obliged to dismiss 
'' you from your employment as Assistant Eesident of 
“ Lebak. 

“ Yet, in consideration of the favourable reports received 
“ formerly of you, I have not found cause to deprive you 
of the prospect of again getting a situation in the 
“ Government of the interior. I have therefore given 
you the temporary appointment of Assistant Eesident 
of Ngawie. On your behaviour in this office, it will 
“ entirely depend whether you remain a functionary in 
the service of the Government.^' 



396 


MAX HAVELAAK. 


And beneath that stood the name of the man on whose 
“ zeal, capacity, and good faith," the King said that he 
could rely, when he signed his appointment as Governor- 
General of the Dutch Indies. 

“We go from here, dear Tine,” said Havelaar ; and he 
gave the letter to Verhrugge, who read the document with 
Duclari. 

Verhrugge had tears in his eyes, but did not speak. 
Duclari, a very polite and well-bred man, burst out with 
a wild curse. 

“ G , I have seen rogues and thieves in the Govern- 

ment here, . . . they have gone from here with honours, 
and to you they write such a letter !” 

“ It is nothing,” said Havelaar ; “ the Governor-General 
is an honest man, ... he must be deceived ; though he 
cordd have guarded himself against that deceit, by first 
hearing me. But I will go to him, and show him how 
matters stand here ... he will do justice, I am certain 
of it.” 

“ But if you go to Ngawie . . . .” 

“ I know this for certain. The Regent of Ngawie is re- 
lated to the Regent of Bantam. I should have to do the 
same at Ngawie that I have done here : that would be a 
useless journey. 

“ Moreover, it was impossible for me to serve the trial as 
if I had behaved ill ... . and, finaUy, I see that to put 
an end to aU this deceit, I can no longer be a functionary. 



MAX HAVKLAAR. 


397 


As functionary, there are too many persons between me 
and the Government who have an interest in denying the 
misery of the population. There are other reasons that 
prevent me from going to Ngawie. There was no vacancy 
there ; there has been one made for me Look here ! ” 

And he showed in the Javanese newspaper, which had 
come by the same post, that indeed, in the same decree of 
the Government whereby he was appointed Assistant 
Eesident of Ngawie, the Assistant Resident of that place 
was appointed to another district where there was a 
vacancy. 

" Do you know why I have to go to Ngawie, and not to 
the district where there was a vacancy ? 

“ I will tell you ^the Resident of Madioen, to which 

Ngawie belongs, is the brother-in-law of the late Resident of 
Bantam. I have said that such scandalous things went on 
here, that the Regent had had such bad examples . . .” 

“ Ah,” cried Verbrugge and Duclari at the same time. 
They understood why Havelaar was transferred to Ngawie 
in particular, to be tried if he would perhaps correct him- 
self. 

"And there is still another reason why I cannot go 
there,” said he. “The present Governor-General will 

soon resign, 1 do not know his successor, nor what I 

may expect of hiin.^ In order to do something in time for 

1 In the original ms. the author wrote : “ I know his successor, I 
know what I may expect of him.” This was changed against the will 



398 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


those poor people, I must speak to the present Governor 
before his departure, and if I went now to Ngawie, that 
would be impossible .... Tine ! ” 

" Dear Max ! ” 

" You have courage, have you not ? ” 

"Max! you know I have courage when I am with 
you.” 

“Good!” 

He went and wrote the following, in his own opinion 
an example of eloquence : — 


“ Rankas-Betono, 20t/i March 1866. 

“ To the Governor- General of the Dutch Indies. 

“ I have had the honour to receive the official letter of 
“ your Excellency of the 23d inst.. No. 54. In reply to 
“ that document, I feel constrained to beg your Excellency 
“ to grant me an honourable discharge from the service of 
“ the Government. 

(Signed) “ Max IIavelaar.” 

It needed not so long a time at Buitenzorg to grant the 
asked-for discharge, as was needed to decide how Have- 
laar’s accusation could be turned away. For the latter a 
month was required, and the news of the discharge arrived 
in a few days at Lebak. 

and without the knowledge of the author. We give this note with the 
authorization of the author. 



MAX HAVELAAR. 


399 


"God be praised,” said Tine, "that you can be your 
own self at last.” 

Havelaar received no instructions to surrender the 
Government to Verbrngge ; he therefore awaited his suc- 
cessor. The latter was a long time in coming, because he 
had to travel from a remote corner of Java. After wait- 
ing three weeks, the ex-officio Assistant Eesident of 
Lebak, who had, however, stUl acted as such, wrote the 
following letter to the Controller Verbrugge : — 

“No. 153. 

“ Rakkas-Bktono, 15//t April 1856. 

" To the Controller of Lehah. 

“ You know that I have received at my own request an 
“ honourable discharge from the service of the Government 
“ by decree of 4th inst.. No. 4. Perhaps T should have 
“ acted rightly, if, on the receipt of this decree, I had re- 
“ signed my office of Assistant Eesident immediately ; as 
“ it seems to be an anomaly to fulfil a function without 
“ being a functionary. 

“ Yet I received no instructions to surrender my office, 
“ and partly from the idea of the obligation not to leave 
“ my post without being duly relieved, partly from causes 
“ of subordinate interest, I waited for the arrival of my 
“ successor, thinking that that functionary would arrive 
“ soon, at least this month. 

“ Now I hear from you that my successor may not be 



400 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


" expected so soon ^you have, as I think, heard this 

“ news at Serang, — and at the same time that the Kesident 
“ was astonished that I, in the very peculiar position in 
“ which I am, have not yet asked to he allowed to transfer 
“ the Government to you. Nothing could be more agrec- 
“ able to me than this news, for I need not assure you, 
“ that I, who have declared myself unable to serve other - 
“ wise than I have done, who have been punished for this 
“ way of serving witli censure,^ with a ruinous and dis- 
" creditable transfer, witli an order to betray the poor 
“ men who confided in my good faith, with the choice also 
" between dishonour and starvation .... that I had to 
“ consider with pains and care, everything if it was in 
“ harmony with my duty, and that the most simple matter 
“ was difficult for me, placed as I was between my con- 
“ science and the principles of the Government, to which 
“ I owe fidelity as long as I am not freed from my func- 
“ tions. This difficulty showed itself principally in the 
“ reply which I had to give to plaintiffs. 

“ I had once promised to betray nobody to the rancour 
“ of his chiefs ; — once I had, imprudently enough, given 
“ my word for the justice of the Government. 

“ The poor popffiation could not know that this promise 
“ and this bail had been denied, and that I, poor and impot- 
“ ent, stood alone with my desire for justice and humanity. 

“ And people went on complaining. It was painful, 
^ Literally — “ For the manner in which T served.’* 



MAX HAVELAAR. 


401 


“ after the receipt of the missive of 23d March, to sit there 
“ as a supposed refuge, as a powerless protector. 

“ It was heart-rending to hear the complaints of ill- 
“ treatment, extortion, poverty, hunger, whilst I myself 
“ had, with a wife and child, to meet hunger and poverty ! 

“ Neither could I betray the Government. I might not 
“ say to these poor people : ‘ Go and suffer, for it is the 
“ will of the Government that you should suffer extortion.’ 
“ I might not avow my impotence, one as it was with the 
“ shame and unconscionahleness of the Governor-General’s 
“ coimseUors. 

“ Here is what I replied : 

“ ‘ I cannot help you immediately, but I will go to 
“ Batavia ; I will s^jeak to the Governor about your 
“ misery. ITo is just, and he will assist you. Go now 
“ quietly to your home ; do not oppose, do not remove — 
“ wait patiently : 1 think, .... I hope that justice will 
“ be done !’ 

“ So I thought, ashamed as I was of the violation of my 
“ promise of help, to bring my ideas in harmony with my 
“ duty to the Government, which pays me still this month, 
“ and I would have continued thus till the arrival of my 
“ successor, if a particular occurrence had not obliged me 
“ to-day to put an end to this equivocal position. Seven 
“ persons had complained. I gave them the above-men- 
“ tioued reply. They returned to their homes. The dis- 
“ trict chief met them on the way. Ho must have for- 



402 


MAX HAVELAAB. 


" bidden them to leave their village again, and taken away 
" (as I am told) their clothes, to oblige them to remain at 
“ home. One of them escaped, came to me again and 
“ declared ‘ that he did not dare to return to his village! 

“ What I ought to reply to this man, I did not know. 

“ I could not protect him ; 1 might not avow my im- 

‘‘ potence ; I would not prosecute the accused chief, because 
“ this would have appeared as if the matter had been 
“ picked up by me, pour le hesoin de ma cav^e I did not 
“ know what to do 

“ I charge you, until further instructions from the Eesi- 
“ dent of Bantam, with the Government of the district of 
“ Lebak, from to-morrow morning. — The Assistant Eesi- 
“ dent of Lebak, 

(Signed) “ Max Havelaar.” 

Then Havelaar departed with wife and child from 
Eankas-Betong. He refused all escort. Duclari and Ver- 
brugge were deeply touched at the leave-taking. Max was 
likewise moved; above all, when he found at the first 
stage a great number of persons who had gone secretly 
from Eankas-Betong to bid him a last farewell. 

At Serang, the family was received into the house of 
Mr. Slymering, with the ordinary Indian hospitality. 

In the evening many visitors came to the Eesident. 
They said they had come to say farewell to Havelaar, and 
Havelaar received many an eloquent shake of the hand . . • 



MAX HAVELAAR. 


403 


But he had to go to Batavia to speak to the Governor- 
General. 

When they arrived there, he sought for an audience. 
This was refused liim, because his Excellency had a pain 
in his foot. 

Havclaar waited till the foot was cured. Then he again 
sought an audience. 

His Excellency “ had so much to do that he had been 
obliged to refuse an audience even to the Director- 
General of Finance, and could not see Havelaar.” 

Havelaar waited till his Excellency should have struggled 
through all this ; meanwhile he felt something like jealousy 
for the persons who had to help his Excellency in his 
labour, for he liked to work quickly and hard, and gene- 
rally so much business disappeared under his hand. This 
was, however, out of the question. Havelaar’s labour was 
heavier than labour. . . . He waited. 

He waited. At last he again sought aii audience. He 
received an answer that his Excellency could not see 
him, as he had too much to do, being on the point of 
departure. 

Max sought the favour of his Excellency to be heard 
for half-an-hour as soon as there should be some space 
between two “ businesses.” 

At last he heard that his Excellency would depart the 
next day ! That was a thunderbolt for him. Still he be- 
lieved with spasmodic energy that the resigning Governor 



404 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


was an honest man, and had been deceived. A quarter of 
an hour would have sufficed to prove the justice of his 
cause, and it appeared that this quarter of an hour would 
not be granted him. 

I find among Havelaar’s papers the copy of a letter 
which he seems to have written to the retiring Governor- 
General, on the last evening before his departure to the 
mother country. In the corner I find the words written 
in pencil “ not exact” which gives me to understand that 
some phrases were changed in copying. I make this 
observation in order that no doubt may arise regarding 
the authenticity of the other official documents which I have 
communicated, and which have all been signed by another 
hand for exact copy ; I mention this, because of the want 
of literal conformity with this document. Perhaps he 
to whom this letter was addressed may feel inclined to 
make' public the exact text ; then one may see how fur 
Havelaar deviated from this copy. 


“ Batavia, 2 Zd May 1856. 

“ Your Excellency, — My official request, by missive 
“ of 28 th February, to be heard on the affairs of Lebak, 
“ has remained unanswered. 

“ Neither has your Excellency thought fit to grant my 
“ repeated request for an audience. 

“A functionary, who was ‘favourably known to the 
“ Government ’ (I quote your Excellency’s own words). 



MAX HAVELAAR. 


405 


" —one who has served his country in these regions for 
“ seventeen years, — one who not only never neglected his 
“ duty, but who conceived what was good with unexampled 
“ self-sacrifice, and who chose to sacrifice all for honour 
“ and dirty, — such a one your Excellency has placed be- 
neath the criminal, for the criminal is at least heard. 

“ That they have deceived your Excellency with regard 
“ to me, I understand,- but that your Excellency did not 
“ catch the opportunity to escape from this deceit, I do 
“ not understand. To-morrow your Excellency goes from 
“ here, and I may not let you depart without having said 
“ once more that I did my duty, — only my duty, — with 
“ judgment, with cahnness, with humanity, with modera- 
“ tion, and with courage. 

“ The grounds on which is based the censure contained 
“ in your Excellency’s missive of 23d March are entirely 
“ invented and false. I can prove this, and it would have 
“ been proved already, if your Excellency had granted me 
“ half-an-hour’s inteiwiew, if your Excellency could have 
“ found half-an-hour to do justice. 

“ This you could not ; and an honest family has been 
“ ruined. 

“ Yet I do not complain of this. 

“ But your Excellency has sanctieied the system of 

“ ABUSE OF POWER, OF PLUNDER AND MURDER, BY WHICH 
“ THE POOR Javanese suffer, and I complain of that. 

“ That is what I complain of ! 



406 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


“ Your Excellency, blood cleaves to the money saved 
“ out of the Indian salary thus earned ! Once more I beg 
“ for a moment’s interview, be it this night, be it early to- 
“ morrow ! And again I do not ask this for myself, but 
“ for the cause which I defend, the cause of justice and 
“ humanity, which is, at the same time, the cause of good 
“ policy. 

“If your Excellency can reconcile it with your con- 
“ science, to depart from here without hearing me, mine 
“ will be quiet in the persuasion that I have endeavoured 
“ all that I could to prevent the sad bloody events, which 
“ will soon be the consequence of the self-willed ignorance 
“ in which the Government is left as regards tlie popu- 
“ lation 

(Signed) “ Max Havelaar.” 

Havelaar waited that evening. He weiited the whole 
night. He had hoped that perhaps anger at the tone of 
his letter would bring about what he had tried in vain to 
obtain by moderation and patience. 

His hope was vain. The Governor-General departed 
without having heard Havelaar .... 

Another Excellency had retired to the mother country 
to rest ! 

Havelaar wandered about poor and neglected. He 
sought 



MAX IIAVELAAR. 


407 


Enough, my good Stem ! Z, Multatuli, take up the pen. 
You are not called upon to write Havelaar’s biography. I 
created you : I brought you over from Hamburg : I taught 
you good Dutch in a very short time : I made you kiss 
Louise Eosemeyer, of the Eosemeyers, who trade in sugar 
.... it is enough, Stern ! you may go. 


This Shawlman and his wife . . . .” 


Stop ! ! miserable spawn of dirty covetousness and 

blasphemous hypocrisy ! I created you : ^you have 

grown into a monster under my pen : 1 am disgusted 

with my own creation .... choke yourself with coffee 
and begone ! 

Yes, I, Multatuli, ‘‘ who have suffered much,” 1 

take the pen, I do not make any excuses for the form of 

my book, that form was thought proper to obtain my 

object. That object has a double end 

In the first place, I would bring forward something 
which may be preserved as a holy poosaha by “ little 
Max” and his sister, when their parents have died of 
sheer want. 1 would give to these children a testi- 

monial from my own hand. 



408 


MAX HAVELAAR. 


And in tlie second place, I will be read] Yes, I will be 
read ! I will be read by statesmen, who are obliged to pay 
attention to the signs of the times ; by men of letters, 
who must also peep into the book of which so many bad 
things arc said ; by merchants, who have an interest in 
the coffee-auctions ; by lady’s-maids, who read me for a 
few farthings; by Goveriiors-Geiieral in retirement; by 
Ministers who have something to do ; by the lackeys of 
these Excellencies ; by mutes, who, more majoruml^ will 
say that I attack God Almighty, where I attack only the 
god which they made according to their own image ; by 
the members of the Eepresentative Chambers, who must 
know what happens in the extensive possessions over the 
sea, which belong to Holland 

Ay, I shall be read ! 

When I obtain this I shall be content. For I did not 

intend to write well I wished to write so as to be 

heard, and, as one who cries “ Stop thief!” does not care 
about the style of his im^promptu address to the public, I 
too am indifferent to criticism of the manner in which 
I cried my ‘'Stop thief!” 

“ The book is a medley ; there is no order, nothing but 
a desire to make a sensation. The style is bad ; the 
author is inexperienced ; no talent, no method.” .... 

Good ! good ! all very well ! hut the 

Javanese are ill-treated ! 



MAX HAVELAAli. 


409 


For, the merit of my book is this : — ^that refutation of 
its main features is impossible. And the greater the dis- 
approbation of my book, the better I shall be pleased, for 
the chance of being heard will be so much the greater ; — 
and that is what I desire. 

But you, whom I dare to interrupt in your business, 
or in your retirement, ye Ministers and Governors-Gene- 
ral — do not calculate too much upon the inexperience of 
my pen. I could exercise it, and perhaps, by dint of some 
exertions, attain to that skill which would make the truth 
heard by the people. Then I should ask of that people a 
place in the Ecprcsentative Chambers, were it only to pro- 
test against the certificates which arc given vice versa by 
Indian functionaries. 

To protest against the endless expeditions sent, and 
lieroic deeds performed against poor, miserable creatures, 
whose ill-treatment has driven them to revolt. 

To protest against the cowardice of general orders, that 
brand the honour of the nation, by invoking public char- 
ity on behalf of the victims of inveterate piracy. 

It is true those rebels were reduced by starvation 
to skeletons, while those pirates could defend them- 
selves. 

And if that place were refused me, .... if I were still 
disbelieved .... 

Then I should translate my book into the few languages 
that I know, and the many that T yet can learn, to put 



410 


MAX TTAVELAAl^ 


that question to Europe, which I have in vain put to 
Holland. 

And in every capital such a refrain as this would be 
heard : “ There is a band of robbers between Germany 
and the Scheldt !*' 

And if this were of no avail ? . . . . 

Then I should translate my book into Malay, Javanese, 
Soondanese, Alfoer, Boegi, and BaitaK 

And I should sharpen Klewangs, the scimitars and the 
sabres, by rousing with warlike songs the minds of those 

martyrs whom 1 have promised to help 1 M^Utatuli 

would do this ! 

Yes! delivery and help, lawfully if possible; — lawfully 
with moUnce, if need be. 

And that would be very pernicious to the coffee 

AUCTIONS OF THE DUTCH TRADING COMPANY 1 

For I am no fly-rescuing poet, no soft dreamer, like 
the down-trodden Havelaar, who did his duty with th(^ 
courage of a lion, and endured starvation with the patience 
of a marmot in winter. 

This book is an introduction .... 

I shall increase in strength and sharpness of weapons, 
according as it may be necessary. 

Heaven grant that it may not be necessary ! . . . . 

No, it will not be necessary ! For it is to thee I dedi- 
cate my book : William the Third, King, Grand Duke, 
Prince, . . . more than Prince, Grand Duke and King, 



MAX HAVELAAR. 


411 


.... Emperor of the magnificent empire of Insulind, 
which winds about the equator like a garland oi‘ 
emeralds! .... 

I ask Thee if it be thine Imperial will that the Have- 
laars should be bespattered with tlie mud of Slymerings 
and Drystubbles ; and that thy more than thirty millions 
of Subjects far away should be ill-treated and should suffer 
extortion in THY name ? 


KDINBUROU : T. CON8TABLK, 

I'RINTKB TO TITE QUEEM, AXD TO THE IJMVEHST'IY 







823/DEK 

miiiiiittiiiiiiiiiii 




